



Deformation and river response 

Before specific examples of syntectonic impacts on alluvial rivers can be discussed, a brief review of types of tectonic activity, types of rivers, and river response will be presented. This background material sets the stage for detailed discussions that follow. 

Types of deformation

The surficial movements in an alluvial valley can take different forms, as illustrated in Figure 2.1. The displacement can be seismic and associated with earthquakes and abrupt faulting, or it can be aseismic with progressive tilting and warping of the valley floor. Faults may be lateral faults that displace or offset the channel (Figure 2.1A) without vertical displacement. This type of displacement should be easily recognized. Faults with vertical displacement may have the uplifted block upstream of the fault with the result that gradient is steepened (Figure 2.1B). In the opposite case, the gradient will be decreased (Figure 2.1C). The effect will resemble monoclinal tilting (Figure 2.1F, G). Pairs of faults may produce uplifted (horst) or downdropped blocks (graben) that will both steepen and reduce gradient (Figure 2.1D, E). This has the same effect as domes and anticlines or basins and synclines (Figure 2.1H, I). 

In addition to all of these structural features, the entire valley may be tilted upstream or downstream or the tilting may be across the valley toward either side of the floodplain (Figure 2.1J, K, L). The possibilities are great, but in reality the result will be local steepening or reduction of gradient or cross-valley tilting. 

Streams respond to vertical displacement along faults (Figure 2.1B and C) by aggradation or degradation. When the displacement produces a channel segment steeper than the original stream gradient (Figure 2.1B), erosion will be initiated in this reach. When the displacement produces a channel segment of lower elevation or gradient than the original stream (Figure 2.1C), aggradation will occur. Even small displacements may be sufficient to induce aggradation or degradation of large streams. If the displacement forms a dam (Figure 2.1C), the stream will be blocked, and it will flow along the fault or form a lake. Wallace (1968) mentioned that even a few inches of vertical upthrow along the downstream side of a fault can produce a dam across a small stream, which can divert its course. 

NULL

Figure 2.1 Surface deformation by faulting, folding, and lateral tilting. Plan view on left; cross-section on right (from Ouchi, 1983) small arrows indicate direction of flow. Large arrows indicate direction of movement. The displacement in each case is greatly exaggerated. 

Horst and graben (Figure 2.1D and E) combine two different types of vertical displacement (Figure 2.1B and C). There will be aggradation upstream from the horst, and degradation, which will migrate upstream, on the downstream part of the horst. Reduced sediment supply because of aggradation upstream will enhance the downstream degradation. Upstream of the graben, there will be degradation and aggradation in the graben itself. A river in such a location will be unstable, as Cartier and Alt (1982) suggested for the Bitterroot River in Montana. 

The type of folding (Figure 2.1) will affect a river similar to the various types of faulting, but changes will probably be less abrupt. The effects of tilting will depend upon the amount, but in the simplest case, steepening of a valley will cause degradation (Figure 2.1K) and a reverse tilt (Figure 2.1L) will cause deposition. Lateral tilting will cause channel shift downdip (Figure 2.1J) or avulsion. 

Figure 2.1 shows only simple, but exaggerated cases, whereas actual displacements can be more complicated. For example, faults can take any angle from parallel to perpendicular to river flow direction. Fault displacements of the surface at the time of an earthquake are obvious, and its influence on alluvial rivers can be observed. For example, small stream channels have been offset by strike-slip movement (Figures 1.8, 2.1A) of the San Andreas fault. Wallace (1968) pointed out that the offset of a stream channel depends on the relative rates of fluvial and tectonic processes. The main reason why channel offset caused by the San Andreas fault is clear is the extremely high rate of displacement along the fault (20.3 mm/year, Brown and Wallace, 1968) and the relatively small size of streams crossing and flowing along the fault. While fault displacements are obvious, movements of the land surface by folding can be slow. However, this type of deformation can also be an important influence on river behavior. For example, concentration of erosion along only one river bank can be the result of lateral tilt (Jefferson, 1907; Nanson, 1980a; Leeder and Alexander, 1987). 

Types of alluvial rivers

It is apparent that different types of alluvial channels will respond differently to deformation; therefore, their characteristics must be reviewed before their response can be evaluated. This can best be done by discussing a simple classification of alluvial channels that is based on type of sediment load and pattern. 

Five basic channel patterns exist (Figure 2.2): (1) straight channels with either migrating sand waves; or (2) with migrating alternate bars forming a sinuous thalweg; (3) two types of meandering channels, a highly sinuous channel of equal width (pattern 3a) and channels that are wider at bends than in crossings (pattern 3b); (4) the meandering–braided transition; and (5) a typical braided stream. The relative stability of these channels in terms of their normal erosional activity and the shape and gradient of the channels, as related to relative sediment size, load, velocity of flow, and stream power, are also indicated in Figure 2.2. It has been possible to develop these patterns experimentally by varying the gradient, sediment load, stream power, and the type of sediment load transported by the channel (Schumm and Kahn, 1972). Therefore, alluvial channels have also been classified according to the type of sediment load moving through the channels, as suspended-load, mixed-load, and bed-load channels (Figure 2.2). Water discharge determines the dimensions of the channel (width, depth, meander dimensions), but the relative proportions of bed load (sand and gravel) and suspended load (silts and clays) determine not only the shape of the channel but width–depth ratio and channel pattern. A suspended-load channel has been defined as one that transports less than 3 percent bed load and a bed-load channel as one transporting more than 11 percent bed load (Schumm, 1977). The mixed-load channel lies between these two (Figure 2.2). 

NULL

Figure 2.2 Channel classification based on pattern and type of sediment load with associated variables and relative stability indicated (Schumm, 1981). 

Alluvial rivers that transport clay, silt, sand, and gravel, can be placed within these three general categories. However, within the meandering-stream group there is considerable range of sinuosity (1.25 to 3.0). In addition, in the braided-stream category, there are bar-braided and island-braided channels (islands are vegetated bars). 

Figure 2.2 suggests that the range of channels from straight to braided forms a continuum, but experimental work and field studies have indicated that the changes of pattern between braided, meandering, and straight, occur relatively abruptly at river-pattern thresholds (Figure 2.3). The pattern changes take place at critical values of stream power, gradient, and sediment load (Schumm and Kahn, 1972). 

NULL

Figure 2.3 Relation between flume slope and sinuosity during experiments at constant water discharge. Sediment load, stream power, velocity increase with flume slope and a similar relation can be developed with these variables (from Schumm and Khan, 1972). 

Although the five patterns of Figure 2.2 involve all three river types, there are five basic bed-load channel patterns (Figure 2.4A) that have been recognized during experimental studies of channel patterns (Schumm, 1977, p. 158). These five basic bed-load channel patterns can be extended to mixed-load and suspended-load channels to produce 13 river patterns (Figure 2.4). Patterns 1–5 are bed-load channel patterns, patterns 6–10 are mixed-load channel patterns, and patterns 11–13 are suspended-load channel patterns. Figure 2.4 attempts to show sinuosity differences and how the pattern thresholds change with increasing valley slope, stream power and sediment load for each channel type. The three major river types are controlled by type of sediment load, but within each type, the different patterns reflect increased valley slope, sediment load, and stream power. 

The different bed-load channel patterns (Figure 2.4) can be described as follows: Pattern 1, straight, essentially equal-width channel with migrating sand waves. Pattern 2, alternate-bar channel with migrating side or alternate bars and a slightly sinuous thalweg; Pattern 3, low-sinuosity meandering channel with large alternate bars that develop chutes; Pattern 4, transitional meandering-thalweg braided channel. The large alternate bars or point bars have been dissected by chutes, but a meandering thalweg can be identified. Pattern 5 is a typical bar-braided channel. 

As compared to the bed-load channels, the five mixed-load channels (Figure 2.4B) are relatively narrower and deeper, and there is greater bank stability. The higher degree of bank stability permits the maintenance of narrow, deep, straight channels (Pattern 6), and alternate bars stabilize because of the finer sediments to form slightly sinuous channels (Pattern 7). Pattern 8 is a truly meandering channel, wide on the bends, relatively narrow at the crossings, and subject to chute cutoffs. Pattern 9 maintains the sinuosity of a meandering channel, but with a greater sediment transport the presence of bars gives it a composite sinuous-braided appearance. Pattern 10 is a braided channel that is relatively more stable than that of bed-load channel 5, and it is likely to be island-braided. 

NULL

Figure 2.4 The range of alluvial channel patterns for the three channel types: (A) bed-load channel patterns, (B) mixed-load channel patterns, (C) suspended-load channel patterns (from Schumm, 1981). 


Suspended-load channels (Figure 2.4C) are narrow and deeper than mixed-load channels. Suspended load Pattern 11 is a straight, narrow, deep channel. With only small quantities of bed load, this type of channel may have the highest sinuosity of all (Patterns 12 and 13). 

Rivers may undergo a metamorphosis during which the channel morphology changes completely. That is, a suspended-load channel (Pattern 12) could become braided (Pattern 5), or a braided channel (Pattern 5) could become meandering (Pattern 8 or 12), etc., when there is a sufficiently great change in the type of sediment load transported through that channel. Therefore, the change from one type of channel pattern to another may be relatively common, as the nature of the sediment moved through the system changes and this may be the effect of tributary sediment contributions, or upstream degradation or aggradation or tectonics. 

There is an additional channel pattern that spans the range of stream types of Figure 2.4. This is the anastomosing pattern of branching and rejoining channel segments (Schumm et al., 1996). The channel segments can be straight, meandering, or braided, and they appear to span the range of channel types. Anastomosing or anabranching channels differ from braided channels because they are composed of multiple channels that are separated by a floodplain (Figure 2.5), whereas braided channels have multiple thalwegs in a single channel. Knighton and Nanson (1993) and Richards et al. (1993) suggest that this pattern is transitioned to a single channel because anastomosing rivers appear to be associated with partly blocked valleys (Smith and Smith, 1980) and tectonic uplift (Gregory and Schumm, 1987). Reduced gradient from whatever cause appears to be important, and therefore, anastomosing reaches of a river can be evidence of tectonic activity. 

Evidence of deformation 

The first geomorphic clues of active tectonics may be tectonic landforms that result from long-continued deformation such as modified drainage networks and deformed sets of terraces. These obvious features are in contrast to the more subtle changes of alluvial rivers. 

Drainage networks

The arrangement of streams and tributaries into a drainage network is affected by the regional slope of the surface on which the pattern develops, climate, and the erodibility of the surface material. Local variations in both slope and materials will cause variations in the drainage pattern (Figure 1.2). For example, experimental studies demonstrated that parallel drainage patterns form on slopes greater than about 2.5 percent, whereas dendritic patterns form on gentler slopes (Phillips and Schumm, 1987). 

NULL

Figure 2.5 Map of anastomosing channels of Ovens and King Rivers. Numbers indicate relative ages of channels and reaches of channels from youngest (1) to oldest (4) (from Schumm et al., 1996). 

Local variations in regional surface slope can cause anomalous drainage patterns. A topographic high caused by active uplift, will cause a deflection of portions of the drainage pattern. For instance, on the upslope side of an uplift the local surface slope will be opposite that of the regional slope. This can cause portions of the drainage pattern to develop in a direction opposite to that of the drainage network. An uplift may also deflect portions of the drainage from the general direction of the regional slope (Figure 2.6). As the major streams are deflected away from the uplift, tributaries on one side will be lengthened and those on the other side will be shortened. 

Changes of an entire drainage network, as a result of tilting, are described by Sparling (1967) who notes that isostatic adjustment in Ottawa County, Ohio has increased the gradient of some streams and decreased the gradient of others. Incision of the steepened streams permitted them to capture the streams that were aggrading as a result of reduced gradient. Russell (1939) described various drainage patterns found in the flat alluvial lands of Louisiana, and he recognized a network pattern of poorly developed drainage channels that was converted to a dendritic pattern, as a result of tilting and steepening of the gradient. 

NULL

Figure 2.6 Drainage pattern modified by uplift. 

Price and Whetstone (1977) used asymmetric river and valley cross-section profiles, as evidence for movement along the Chattahoochee Embayment in Florida. Subsidence caused southward migration of east–west flowing channels. South-flowing streams exhibit paired terraces while east–west trending streams contain extensive terraces on the northern side with few or no terraces on the steeper southern margin. Subsidence in the Chattahoochee Embayment and adjacent warping along the Chattahoochee Uplift resulted in asymmetrical incision along the Chattahoochee River. 

Long-continued tilting in a cross-valley direction will cause lateral erosion and the development of an asymmetrical valley and drainage network. Muehlberger (1979) noted this type of asymmetry in an area near Taos, New Mexico (Figure 2.7). Using 71⁄minute U.S. Geological Survey topographic

2 maps, he described this asymmetry quantitatively. By selecting a contour on the valley wall and measuring the distance from the stream to this contour in a down-tilt direction (Dd) and in the opposite, uptilt direction (Du) an index of asymmetry was developed (Dd/Du) (Figure 2.7). The index for 30 small drainage basins was 0.6 indicating a major displacement of the main channel in a down-tilt direction. Cox (1994) used a somewhat different index to demonstrate tilting and river shift in the southwestern Mississippi Embayment. Other indices of asymmetry are described by Keller and Pinter (1996, pp. 126, 127). 

NULL

Figure 2.7 Map of asymmetrical stream valleys in the vicinity of Taos, New Mexico showing method of measuring distances used in calculating index of asymmetry (modified after Muehlberger, 1979). 

Lake patterns

Lakes are temporary features in terms of geological time, but they can be clear evidence of deformation. They occur at various scales, along primary or secondary portions of the drainage network, and generally disappear as erosion and deposition occurs through time. They may be isolated, but they are more frequently clustered in a specific area, or they are aligned along specific trends. Isolated lakes are generally due to local events such as landslides or collapses, which form a dam, but clustered lakes are due to regional processes, which may be related to climate (or paleoclimate), neotectonic deformation, or frequently a combination of these processes. 

Large lakes may occupy geological basins, and active tectonics is partly or totally involved in their formation. Such lakes act as drainage collectors and they can occupy various elevations. The Bolivian Altiplano lakes (Titicaca, Popoo, Uyuni) stand at an elevation of around 4000 m and are associated with plate convergence and uplift. Continental stretching and transtensional tectonics are favorable for the formation of basins and tectonic lakes. Often the relation of lakes to faults is obvious, and a study of the lake pattern is not necessary to demonstrate the effect of tectonics. (See Chapter 5 where Reelfoot Lake and the Mississippi valley sunklands are described; Figures 5.1, 5.2). 

NULL

Figure 2.8 Inferred fault zone in the area of the Tupinambaranas, in the Amazon Basin between Obidos and Manaus Brazil (modified after Sternberg, 1955). The river trace and ria lakes suggest a downward movement along the same axis as that of the inferred fault. 

This discussion deals with cases where specific lake patterns, (ria lakes and elongated lakes), are related to active deformation. Most of these concepts are not new. For example, the significance of ria lakes was identified more than 30 years ago. 

Ria Lakes 

Dendritic ria lakes occur at the lower part of a tributary, which is blocked by aggradation along the trunk river (Holz et al., 1979). In the lower and central parts of the Amazonian Basin the formation of ria lakes is related to post-glacial eustacy (Irion, 1984). Some of these lakes have a “knee” pattern superposed on the dendritic pattern suggesting the effect of active faulting through a thick sedimentary cover (Sternberg, 1950, 1955, Figure 2.8). 

NULL

Figure 2.9 Structural scheme of the Marañón Basin in Peru, composed of the Pastaza Basin and the Ucamara Depression. Stars show the location of the main ria lakes, with the area A represented in detail. The contour lines show the isobath of the pre-Jurassic basement, from Sanz (1974). Section along X–Y in the lower part of the figure, modified after Laurent (1985). 

Reservoirs behind dams take the form of ria lakes. Clusters of ria lakes are observed along large rivers in the western Marañón Basin and in the central Ucayali Basin, Peru (Räsänen et al., 1987; Dumont, 1993). They are related to active subsidence of the back side of piggy back or thrust faults. Similar patterns are observed on the south margin of the Beni Basin (Dumont, 1992; Dumont and Guyot, 1993). 

An elongated cluster of ria lakes is located along the lower Pastaza River and the Marañón River in the western part of the Marañón Basin (Figure 2.9). This cluster is superimposed over the structural axis of the basin, which trends toward the Ucamara Depression. This axis of maximum subsidence of the basin is located in front of the Subandean Thrust and Fault Belt (STFB). 

NULL

Figure 2.10 Relative positions of tectonic lakes in the Peruvian foreland basins. Stars indicate location of clusters of ria lakes (modified after Dumont , 1996). 

The Pastaza depression is filled by more than 4 500 m of Cretaceous and Cenozoic sediments, with about 500 m of Quaternary sediment (Laurent, 1985) (Figure 2.9). No ria lakes are observed in the south part of the Marañón Basin (Ucamara Depression), but ria lakes occur again in the Ucayali Basin of Central Peru (Figure 2.10), a piggy-back basin. 

A continental rift generates tilt of the side blocks in opposite directions and the progressive tilting of the earth’s surface can significantly modify the gradient of rivers. For example, Lake Victoria is drained by the Victoria Nile which flows north to Lake Kyoga (Figure 2.11). Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania look artificial, but they are not the result of dam construction. They are, in fact, formed by uplift and eastward tilting of western Uganda. Flow in the Kafu River has been reversed, and water draining from Lake Victoria has found a new course to the north, where it flows over Murchison Falls and into Lake Albert. The geologically recent derangement of these drainage systems is the result of uplift that is apparently continuing at the present time (Doornkamp and Temple, 1966). 

NULL

Figure 2.11 Lake Kyoga region, Uganda. Arrows show flow directions in rivers. Back tilting explains the shape of Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania (modified after Doornkamp and Temple, 1966). 

Elongated lakes 

The term elongated lakes is applied to lakes that are long and narrow. These lakes are superimposed over basement structures. In subsiding basins, they are also closely related to active tectonics. 

The Puinahua (1324 km2) and Punga (341 km2) lakes are both located in the south part of the Marañón Basin (Figure 2.10). They are long and narrow and wider on the foothill side than on the craton side. Punga Lake is superimposed over the structure of the Santa Elena uplift (Dumont and Garcia, 1991), which is interpreted as a crystalline horst surrounded by Paleozoic sedimentary strata (Laurent, 1985). The NE elongation of the lake is parallel to a few of the structural features mentioned by Laurent (1985). Both lakes are also parallel to the strike of normal faulting with a NNW–SSE extension in the upland border (Dumont et al., 1988). As a result, the lakes are interpreted as the surface expression of tensional stress superimposed over reactivated basement structures due to the onset of Andean tectonics (Dumont and Garcia, 1991). 

More precise morphological evidence of active tectonics comes from the Punga Lake. According to testimony of old settlers and published travel journals (Stiglish, 1904) the area was covered by forest, that developed on a terrace before 1923. Then the region began to subside. The tree trunks of the drowned forest are still visible, now below 2 m of water during low water stages. In this very flat area the water level rises about 2 m during floods, suggesting a minimum subsidence of 4 m over about 70 years. A tectonic interpretation is favored because a local rise of base level cannot be involved. Only a downward motion of the area where the lake is observed can explain the phenomenon. These lakes are related to downdropped blocks that are related to a tensional system. 

Terraces

The vertical warping of terraces, as a result of deformation, has been studied by numerous investigators (Machida, 1960; Zuchiewicz, 1980; King and Stein, 1983). The offset of terraces by lateral faulting gives a clear indication of fault movement. The offset terraces at the mouth of the Waiohine Gorge in New Zealand shows the amount of displacement and the episodic nature of the displacement (Figure 2.12). In addition to river terraces, the deformation of lake terraces and marine terraces (Keller and Pinter, 1996) are proof of isostatic and tectonic activity because they formed horizontally at a given water level. An example is the isostatic deformation of the Pleistocene Lake Bonneville shorelines, Utah (Crittenden, 1963). Portions of the Lake Bonneville shorelines have been deformed as much as 210 feet, as it drained and evaporated to form Great Salt Lake. In addition, deformed marine terraces provide an excellent indication of recent deformation along 440 km of the Pacific Coast of Baja, California (Orme, 1980). Not only are terraces deformed, but as an uplift is crossed, a floodplain can be converted to a low terrace. This will, of course, dramatically alter the hydraulics and hydrology of the reach. 

In addition to the obvious evidence of deformation described above, evidence of deformation is provided by alluvial deposits and paleosoils (Machette, 1978; Keller et al., 1982; Bull, 1984; Rockwell et al., 1984; Rockwell, 1988) by variations in gradients of streams of different orders (Merritts and Vincent, 1989; Merritts and Hesterberg, 1994) and by variations of valley and river longitudinal profiles (Volkov et al., 1967; Seeber and Gornitz, 1983). 

NULL

Figure 2.12 Block diagram of the displaced river terraces at the mouth of the Waiohine Gorge, New Zealand. The West Wairarapa Fault extends from bottom left (southwest) to top right (northeast) and has cut and moved successive river terraces (I = oldest terrace; VI = youngest terrace). The amount (in feet) each terrace has been moved by the fault is indicated (H = amount of horizontal movement; V = amount of vertical movement). The length of the fault shown on the diagram is about 0.8 km (1/2 mile) (modified after Stevens, 1974). 

River response 

The clearest evidence for tectonic effects on rivers are anomalous reaches that show dramatic changes of pattern trend and gradient that cannot be attributed to other causes. Structural geologists and petroleum geologists have known for years that rivers are strong indicators of faulting (Lattman, 1959; Howard, 1967). 

Tectonic activity can significantly control river patterns and behavior, and this is especially true of alluvial rivers. Neef (1966) and Radulescu (1962) state that neotectonic movements can be reflected only in those geomorphic features that react to the smallest changes of slope, such as meander characteristics. In addition, the variations of thickness and distribution of recent sediments indicate the variability of tectonics in a given valley. Clearly, one of the most sensitive indicators of change is the valley floor profile and longitudinal profile of a stream (Bendefy et al., 1967; Zuchiewicz, 1979). 

Alluvial rivers will be very sensitive indicators of valley slope change. In order to maintain a constant gradient, a river that is being steepened by a downstream tilt will increase its sinuosity or braid, whereas a reduction of valley slope will lead to a reduction of sinuosity or aggradation if the pattern cannot change. For example, Twidale (1966) reported that both the Flinders and Leichardt Rivers have changed to a braided pattern, as a result of the steepening of their gradient by the Selwyn Upwarp in northern Queensland, Australia; and the Red River near Winnipeg, Canada is straightening, as a result of reduction of gradient by isostatic rebound (Welch, 1973). Other examples are provided by the Mississippi River between St. Louis and Cairo and the lower Missouri River (Adams, 1980) as well as the Red River of the North near Winnipeg, Canada (Vanicek and Nagy, 1980). 

Baselevel changes can also resemble the effects of active tectonics, and can provide information on channel change. For example, if sea-level is lowered, and a steep portion of the continental shelf is exposed, the effect will be like that downstream of the axis of an uplift. Lane (1955) argued that a lowering of baselevel will cause channel adjustment throughout most of the river. Indeed, Lane’s (1955) argument that a stream will restore its gradient at a higher or lower level following a baselevel change is conceptually correct because if the river is initially at grade, then to move its sediment load and water discharge through the channel, the original gradient of the stream must be reestablished. However, sediment loads may be greater after channel incision and less after aggradation. Another fallacy in Lane’s argument is the assumption that the valley slope and channel gradient are identical. This is not the case, and the two-dimensional perspective leads to erroneous conclusions. For example, a sinuous river has a gradient less than that of the valley floor. 

Sinuosity (P) is the ratio between channel length (L c) and valley length (L v), and it is also the ratio between valley slope (S v) and channel gradient (S c) as follows: 



Therefore, a straight channel has a sinuosity of 1.0, and the gradient of the channel and the slope of the valley floor are the same. It has been demonstrated that rivers can respond to major changes of water and sediment load primarily by pattern changes (Schumm, 1968), and that much of the pattern variability of large alluvial rivers such as the Mississippi, Indus, and Nile, reflect the variability of the valley slope (Schumm et al., 1994; Jorgensen et al., 1993; Schumm and Galay, 1994). 

NULL

Figure 2.13 Effect of a baselevel fall on channel length and pattern. See text for discussion. 

Figure 2.13 illustrates this concept geometrically, and it shows the impact of the lowering of baselevel in a valley with a stream of sinuosity (P) 1.5. The line A–C represents the channel profile, and the line A–B represents the profile of the valley floor. Points B and C are at the river mouth, and points F and G are at the same location in the valley. The channel distance is one-third longer than the valley distance, and the difference in channel and valley slope reflects the sinuosity of the stream. The length of the channel is 1.5 times the length of the valley and, therefore, the stream gradient is one-third less than the valley slope (equation 1). If a vertical fall of baselevel from B to D and C to E is assumed, channel incision and lateral erosion will steepen the valley floor. If the channel is not confined laterally, it can adjust to the increased valley slope (F–D) by increasing sinuosity to 2.0, and the channel profile is extended to H. In this case, incision ceases at point F in the valley and at point G in the channel because the increase of sinuosity from 1.5 to 2.0 from G to H maintains a constant channel gradient over the reach of increased valley slope (F–D). The one-third increase of channel length (sinuosity) between G and H compensates for a one-third steepening of the valley floor from F to D. 

According to Lane’s assumptions, the effect of this baselevel fall would be propagated upstream to point A, where an amount of erosion equal to B–D would occur. However, because the stream can adjust, the steepening of the valley floor will not result in a change of stream gradient. Rather the channel lengthens, and the effect of baselevel lowering is propagated only a relatively short distance upstream. The distance will undoubtedly depend on local conditions and the original slope of the valley floor, but this exercise supports Saucier’s (1991) contention that Pleistocene sea level change in the lower Mississippi valley was effective only as far as Baton Rouge (see also Blum, 1993 and Blum and Valastro, 1994). The probability that a large river can adjust in this fashion is made more likely by the fact that the baselevel changes in nature will take place relatively slowly and not abruptly, unlike during the experimental studies. The river, therefore, has more time to adjust by changing sinuosity. 

Further evidence for the type of channel response shown in Figure 2.13 is demonstrated by the experimental studies of Jeff Ware (1992 oral comm.). He lowered baselevel relatively slowly to a maximum of 12 cm in a flume with a total length of 18.4 m. This change would have doubled the channel gradient. However, the effect of the baselevel lowering extended only 4 m upstream, and the change in baselevel was accommodated by an increase of sinuosity from 1.2 to 1.5 in the lower 4 m in the flume. It is clear, however, that pattern change did not totally compensate for the change of baselevel. This channel widened and roughness increased, thereby assuming part of the adjustment to the baselevel change. 

Ware’s experiments showed that a sinuosity increase, which resulted in a slope decrease, was only part of the adjustment, and width, depth, and roughness adjusted to decrease velocity and stream power. Therefore, channel pattern change may only absorb part of a valley slope or baselevel change. The River Nile provides an example of such shared adjustment with both sinuosity and width changing as valley slope changes (Schumm and Galay, 1994). 

Changes of valley-floor gradient provide an explanation of downstream pattern variations, but variations of valley-floor slope can be the result of several influences. Tectonic activity may change the slope of the valley floor and have its effect on the channel pattern (Adams, 1980). In addition, a high-sediment-transporting tributary may build a fan-like deposit in the valley, which will persist even after the tributary sediment load has decreased. When the main river crosses this fan, pattern changes will result, as the river attempts to maintain a constant gradient. Tributaries to the Jordan River in Israel have developed fan-like deposits in the valley, and the valley floor of the Jordan Valley undulates as a result. The Jordan River, as it approaches one of these convexities, straightens as it crosses the upstream flatter part of the fan and then it develops a more sinuous course on the steeper downstream side of the fan (Schumm, 1977, p. 140). 

It is important to realize that channels that lie near a pattern threshold (Figure 2.3) may change their characteristics dramatically with only a slight change in the controlling variable. For example, some rivers that are meandering and that are near pattern thresholds become braided with only a small addition of bed load (Schumm, 1979). Experimental studies and field observations confirm that a change of valley-floor slope will cause a change of channel morphology. The change will differ, however, depending where the channel lies on a plot such as that of Figure 2.3 and depending on the type of channel (Figure 2.4). For example, with increasing slope, a straight channel will become sinuous, a low sinuosity channel will become more sinuous, and a meandering channel will braid. With decreasing slope, a braided channel will meander and a meandering channel will straighten. 

NULL

Figure 2.14 Reaches of degradation and aggradation associated with uplift and faulting. 

Although pattern changes may dominate river response, deposition in reaches of reduced gradient is likely as is channel incision and bank erosion in reaches of steepened gradient (Figure 2.14). In fact, upstream deposition will reduce downstream sediment loads thereby increasing the tendency for downstream erosion. Therefore, in addition to the primary valley-floor deformation by active tectonics and the secondary channel response to this deformation, there are third-order effects beyond the area of deformation. For example, deposition upstream from the axis of a dome can progress further upstream by backfilling beyond the area of active deformation (Figure 2.14). This means that the uplift is acting as a dam, and unless erosion on the steeper downstream side of the uplift produces sufficient sediment to compensate, erosion will occur downstream beyond the limits of deformation. However, it is more likely that reduced sediment load will accelerate erosion on the steeper downstream reach, and when this increased load moves downstream, aggradation will result (Figure 2.14). 

NULL

Figure 2.15 Effect of change from weaker (W) to more resistant (R) materials on meander pattern. 

Another aspect of both active and neotectonics is the appearance of more resistant materials in the channel as the channel degrades. Resistant alluvium (clay plugs, gravel armor) or bedrock will confine the channel and retard meander shift and bank erosion. The result should be deformed or compressed meanders upstream and a change of meander character at the contact. For example, as meanders shift downvalley, their movement may be retarded if more resistant alluvium or bedrock is encountered (Jin and Schumm, 1987). Hence, a fault may present a barrier with the result that upstream meanders are compressed and deformed (Figure 2.15). A similar pattern will result if the river encounters bedrock as it crosses an upwarp or if, as a result of incision, it encounters resistant materials in a portion of its course. Yeromenko and Ivanov (1977) reviewed the Russian literature and concluded that for rivers crossing uplifts, the largest number of meanders occur upstream of the structures, which supports Gardner’s (1975) observations of bedrock channels in the Colorado Plateau. This is the reverse of what is expected for alluvial channels from the relation of Figure 2.3. Therefore, an investigator must not simply base conclusions on river pattern alone. 

Discussion

Alluvium is usually assumed to hide the underlying geology, but rates of active tectonic movement are sufficiently rapid to affect the morphology and behavior of alluvial rivers. Rivers being the most sensitive components of the landscape will provide evidence of even, slow, aseismic tectonic activity. For example, evidence of active tectonics is as follows: 


	1. deformation of valley floor longitudinal profile.
	2. deformation of channel longitudinal profile.
	3. change of channel pattern.
	4. change of channel width and depth.
	5. conversion of floodplain to a low terrace.
	6. reaches of active channel incision or lateral shift.
	7. effects both upstream and downstream of the zone of deformation (degradation, aggradation, flooding, bank erosion).
	8. formation of lakes. 


Alluvial channels are sensitive indicators of change, but they also adjust to changes of hydrology and sediment load as well as to active tectonics. Therefore, it may be difficult to determine the cause of channel change when, in fact, human activities have been changing both discharge and sediment load during historic time. Pattern change alone is not sufficient evidence for active tectonics, rather it is one bit of evidence that must be supported with other morphologic evidence and/or surveys that provide clear evidence of deformation. In many areas, the evidence will be circumstantial. Nevertheless, anomalous reaches that are not related to artificial controls, tributary influences, lithologic change, or paleotectonics may reasonably be assumed to be the result of active tectonics until proved otherwise. 

Lakes can also provide information on subsidence, and ria lakes can be evidence of tilting or even hydrologic and climatic influences. For example, during Pleistocene aggradation in the Ohio River and Mississippi River valleys, numerous lakes formed in tributary valleys. Therefore, care must be exercised when determining the tectonic significance of lakes and other river anomalies. 







7 The future of boundaryless careers



When massive economic restructuring forced William H. Whyte Jr’s (1956) ‘organization man’ to walk permanently out of the front doors of the corporation, many of the assumptions of a traditional career path followed shortly behind. In the wake of his departure, people were left pondering how they would survive without a job for life, a corporate ‘road map’ to guide their destiny and the firm’s hierarchy to define their status or place in society. Without employers’ orderly structures, external guides for action, and linear career paths, however, just what is the future of career? When ‘the career’ devolves to the level of the individual does free agency prevail and a form of ‘career anarchy’ result? Is there anything that can be concluded about careers if everyone seems to be doing their own thing? 

We argue here that the answer is an emphatic ‘yes’. The new environment suggests a shift from pre-ordained and linear development to perpetually changing career paths and possibilities. As a result a shift from ‘bounded’ careers – prescribed by relatively stable organisational and occupational structures – to ‘boundaryless’ careers – where uncertainty and flexibility are the order of the day – is increasingly common. The concept of the boundaryless career is broadly based, and intended to reflect the emergent pace of economic change. It does not characterise any single career form, but rather ‘a range of possible forms that defy traditional employment assumptions’ (Arthur & Rousseau, 1996, p. 6). 

The myriad interactions of a boundaryless career over a lifetime of work experiences can appear overwhelming. A complex web of relationships emerges from numerous exchanges among individuals, teams, and employers. The interplay may seem downright chaotic. So much so, that one may be tempted to think that no aggregates can be drawn from this seemingly random micro-level behaviour. Yet, despite the large amount of publicity generated as ‘organization man’ was shown to the door, a large proportion of people who participate in the work place, and even whole industries, never really played by the traditional rules anyway. For these people and industries the ‘boundaryless career’ is simply business as usual. It is business to which we can turn to understand better the future of career or – as we see the future – the boundaryless career. 

We focus in this chapter on situations where boundaryless career practices appear to be well established and fruitful, involving industries where open labour markets have thrived. Our examination suggests that seemingly random micro-level activities result in the creation of emergent pattern and order. Further examination reveals not only order, but remarkable stability. In the absence of external guides, people selforganise to learn and make sense of their environments. Moreover, the resulting social interdependence provides a new form of cohesiveness that, in turn, introduces new structure. Micro-level activities gather the force and the power to shape macro-level processes and larger institutions. It is organising, rather than organisation, that is the catch-word of the boundaryless career. 

In this chapter we set out to explore the pervasive nature of boundaryless careers. We present a theoretical perspective through which we can understand the dynamics of boundaryless careers followed by descriptive analysis demonstrating evidence of theory in practice in two selected industries. First we present relevant aspects of Karl Weick’s work (1979, 1995, and 1996) and discuss the process of ‘enactment’. We then examine the industry cases. We conclude by refining the arguments by noting key behavioural aspects of enactment and other considerations of the process. 

An enactment perspective 

Our exploration in this chapter is framed in the social–psychological perspective of Karl Weick (1996). Weick’s work provides a theoretical lens for explaining the processes at work in boundaryless career behaviour. His conception of enactment, directly related to his previous (1995) work on sensemaking, explains the dynamics of the characteristic interdependence that operates in boundaryless careers. The enactment view emphasises that action creates the environment. That is, people create situations and understandings out of their own dispositions and backgrounds. A simple analogy is with the legal system. People enact laws, which become part of the legal system which in turn influences further behaviour, leading people to enact new laws, and so on. A legal system continually evolves from the enactment of individual laws. Similarly, career systems evolve from the enactment of individual careers. 

Another way to engage with enactment is to relate it to the process of natural selection. According to Weick (1996), careers unfold through successive cycles of enactment, selection, and retention, whereby the enactment of careers gives rise to broader organising of work arrangements. From this standpoint, the ‘basic theme for the entire organizing model is found in the following recipe for sensemaking: ‘‘How can I know what I think until I see what I say?’’ ’ (Weick, 1979, p. 133). In the simplest form of the recipe, enactment is ‘saying’ (action), selection is ‘seeing what I say’ (perception), and retention is ‘knowing what I think’ (sensemaking). 

If enactment is ‘saying’ then it is, in essence, the action of individuals in their environment that starts the process. When someone takes action, or interacts with their environment, it immediately impacts others and hence the individual produces part of their environment. For example, if you believe a certain group of individuals to be hostile, when you interact with them your behaviour may reflect your fear. In response they may sense that fear and behave in a hostile manner. The environment becomes hostile. Moreover, you have contributed to ‘enacting’ that hostile environment. The result is a circular self-reinforcing relationship resembling a self-fulfilling prophecy. An alternative, perhaps more satisfactory circular relationship could result if, instead of fear, you initially showed confidence. 

How do we relate this process to boundaryless careers? For this, it is important to understand that there is less room for personal inputs, manoeuvring, or ‘enactment’ if there are clear salient rules and structures defining behaviour. In traditional bounded organisations and careers the proliferation of structure, hierarchy, plans, detailed job descriptions, prescribed relationships, and established ‘road maps’ provide an armoury of articulated rules and social cues to guide behaviour. The situation is ‘strong’ (Mischel, 1968) in as much as it provides little scope for improvisation. 

In the pure form of the boundaryless career, however, such explicit guides do not exist. Instead of providing clear guidelines, employment situations are characterised by ambiguity. ‘Weak’ situations fall short of providing sufficient incentives for consistent behaviour or even similar expectations for those operating within them (Mischel, 1968). In ‘weak’ situations individuals are not able to interpret events in the same way, and the resulting ambiguity opens the door to myriad personal interpretations and opportunities for enactment. People engage in a stable process of trial and error that resembles an evolutionary system (Weick, 1979). People join together in shared improvisation that begins to form new codes and structures to guide their further behaviour. In the process ‘microstrength shapes macroweaknesses’ (Weick, 1996, p. 44) through the unfolding of boundaryless careers. 

To illustrate the preceding argument we will apply Weick’s ideas to descriptions provided by AnnaLee Saxenian (1996) on the dynamics of the Silicon Valley and by Candace Jones (1996) on the independent film industry. We reinterpret the contributions of these authors by explicitly re-framing them within Weick’s framework (and we emphasise it is these three authors, and their original descriptions and ideas, that deserve the major part of the credit for this chapter). 

To show how enactment and associated principles of self-organising and learning come to life, we will trace the process of enactment in each setting. First, we will describe the factors that have contributed to boundaryless career forms in each example. Next, we will cite some of the characteristics that make the resulting circumstances ‘weak’. After that we will discuss the social behaviour and collective actions that fill the resulting void in the environment. Finally, we will point out the patterns, order, and shape we see enactment bringing to each of these respective settings. By doing so we hope to convey the pervasive qualities of both the process of enactment and the vehicle through which it operates – the boundaryless career. 

The Silicon Valley 

The Silicon Valley is notorious for the individual and collective success of its firms. So much so that the name ‘Silicon Valley’ has come to be synonymous with the electronics industry. The region is regarded as the centre for excellence and innovation and has given rise to some of the world’s most influential firms, including Apple, Hewlett Packard, and Intel. Since its inception the Valley has operated with an individualistic open labour market. Today, the learning advantages that emanate from associated boundaryless career behaviour are regarded as a key source of competitive advantage for the region (Saxenian, 1996). One can argue that the Valley’s ‘boundarylessness’ is a necessary feature of operating in a dynamic industry that demands constant innovation. Proponents point out that, in order to learn and solve the problems encountered in rapid technological advancement, knowledge must be shared among firms in a symbiotic balance between co-operation and competition. Boundaryless characteristics appear more prominently when an industry is knowledge – rather than capital-intensive or when firms operate in economic clusters. 

However, other industry clusters and several notable large electronics firms do not engage with boundaryless practices. We may, therefore, attribute the ‘boundaryless’ features of the Silicon Valley to its heritage. Some believe this is in part due to the location of the region, hosting a ‘West Coast’ Northern Californian alternative in geographical isolation from the established ‘East Coast’ industry. The greenfield site had an empty slate and no institutional rules. Others, like the late William Hewlett, a key and highly influential founder of the region, believe that success stemmed from the learning advantages of an open labour market. Hewlett ‘routinely offered the following advice . . . ‘‘If you want to succeed here you need to be willing to do three things: change jobs often, talk to your competitors and take risks – even if it means failing’’ ’ (Saxenian, 1996, p. 23). Hewlett was himself influenced by his Stanford Dean of Engineering William Terman, a mentor and an influential Hewlett Packard board member (Collins & Porras, 1995). Today, Hewlett’s and Terman’s philosophy permeates the region. Despite fierce inter-firm competition, open information exchange is common practice among the region’s producers. 

Several features of the Valley contribute to creating a ‘weak’ environment. The high pace of technology and product life cycles, fluidity of firm formation and failure, rapid employee turnover resulting in little com-pany-specific socialisation, as well as a lack of meaningful institutionally based hierarchy, all contribute to an environment in which individuals rely on alternative cues to guide their behaviour. For example, in the Valley, technology moves quickly and competition is tough. New firms form almost overnight -and many disappear just as quickly. When firms come and go like ships in the night it is not surprising that employees tend to identify with their profession, not their company. Moreover, people’s loyalty is not only to their profession, but to the host industry region. ‘As one local semiconductor executive reportedly noted: ‘‘Many of us wake up in the morning thinking that we work for Silicon Valley Inc.’’ ’ (Saxenian, 1996, p. 23). They view job-changing as the norm. 

Average job tenure is in the area of two years, and annual turnover is around 35%, and often higher for smaller firms (Saxenian, 1996). As one engineer explained: ‘two or three years is about the max [at a job] for the Valley because there’s always something more interesting across the street’ (Saxenian, p. 28). Knowledge and practices cross company borders at a pace that defies the embedding of ‘routines’ within the boundaries of any single company, and instead favours inter-company exchange. Everyone knows that, upon leaving a company, they may well work together again in the future: ‘A colleague might become a customer or a competitor; today’s boss could be tomorrow’s subordinate’ (Saxenian, p. 29). Institutionally based hierarchy, therefore, loses its saliency. In the Valley, respect and authority are gained through competence, technical excellence, and market share, with the highest regard accorded to successful entrepreneurs. 

In the context of this ‘weak’ environment, clear social behaviour emerges as structure gets built at the micro-level. People seek to form relationships and routines in order to learn and thrive in their surroundings. In the Valley, information is the life-blood of the industry and continuous learning through relationships is the key to a successful career. People build their own competence by active membership in the larger learning community. Learning takes place in the pub or club. In the Valley’s early days, it used to take place in the infamous Wagon Wheel Bar and the Homebrew Computer Club. Now it takes place in one of many watering holes or hobby groups where the Valley’s high-technology workers regularly meet for lunch or after work. In these meeting places, people gather to see old friends, gossip, and make new acquaintances. In the workers’ adopted social settings, the transition from friendly chatter to serious business occurs naturally. 

In the Silicon Valley, collective actions unfold through a combination of mutual interests, intellectual curiosity, and problem solving geared towards developing new markets, technologies, products, or applications for computers. Workers have a systemic commitment to technical excellence in their field. As one engineer explained, the process is quite simple: ‘people rub shoulders and share ideas’ (Saxenian, p. 27). The knowledge of these informal groups is so powerful that many ‘local entrepreneurs came to see social relationships and even gossip as crucial aspects of their business’ (Saxenian, p. 26) As one local manager claimed: ‘‘‘Over a lunch conversation or a beer, you’ll learn that company A or company B has a technology you want . . . If it fits your needs, you’ll build it into your next product’’’ (Saxenian, p. 31). In this manner, micro-level conversations influence the creation of new technologies, products, and applications. 

It is through such social interaction and collective action that we begin to understand how patterns and order emerge in the Valley. In the absence of hierarchy and centralised planning, employees in the Valley rely on their skills, rather than on formal position, to provide a reference point for their careers. Such self-generated guides are reinforced by professional social networks, which provide a tacit road map about who knows who and who does what in the industry. These networks serve as efficient job search networks and makeshift recruitment centres. As one engineer reported: ‘‘‘You don’t just hire people out of the blue. In general, it’s people you know, or you know someone who knows them’’’ (Saxenian, p. 27). Social networks impose structure on larger and looser situations. It is the region and its relationships, rather than the firm, that define opportunities for individual and collective advances in Silicon Valley (Saxenian, 1996). 

Thus, while Silicon Valley’s high rates of job mobility and new-firm formation lead to local losses for individual firms, they also foster a dynamic process of adaptation that spurs the evolution of the region. Knowledge of the latest techniques in design, production, and marketing is diffused rapidly throughout the area. The result is an exceptional rate of technical and organisational innovation created by a ‘complex mix of social solidarity and individualistic competition’ (Saxenian, 1996, p. 25). The resilience of Silicon Valley’s economy shows that an unpredictable open labour market and seemingly ‘chaotic’ career paths and relationships have led to macro-economic stability for the region and hence continued opportunity for the community at large. ‘Ironically, many of these Silicon Valley job hoppers may well have led more stable lives than the upwardly mobile ‘‘organizational men’’ of the 1950s who were transferred from place to place by the same employer’ (Saxenian, p. 28). 

The independent film-making industry 

Like the Silicon Valley, the independent film-making industry is noted for its innovative ability, cutting edge creativity, and overall economic success. Like in the Silicon Valley, boundaryless careers are central to independent film-making activities. These activities evolved in the wake of fierce competition posed by the proliferation of television and the need to cut fixed costs. They superseded the former studio-based model of in-house film production, and its associated restrictive practices. Since the early 1970s, the new model has persisted. Boundaryless careers provide the building blocks that combine to facilitate production of the industry’s separately creative parts. Independent film production has thrived as a superior organising model to its in-house predecessor (Jones, 1996). 

Several characteristics of the independent film industry favour boundarylessness, including the uncertainty in the marketplace, the limited project duration, the lack of vertical integration among industry players, and the excess supply of quality labour. The uncertainty of the market stems from the fact that production of any particular film revolves around whether or not sufficient financing is obtained to start and ultimately complete production of any given film. When financing is arranged, it is specifically for the purpose of completing a single project, the making of the film. The limited duration of the project is such that all resources, including human resources, are temporary. The assembled company is essentially wound down upon the film’s release. At this time, the film’s credits symbolise that those who made it have moved on to other assignments. 

Uncertainty over financing and limited project duration foster a ‘weak’ environment in which permanent structure is dysfunctional. Studios combine with subcontractors for specific film projects and disband when the work is done. Moreover, the project-based system allows for highly complex, unique ‘products’ – films – to benefit from rapid and efficient allocation and re-allocation of resources. Each time a film is completed the whole process starts over again and employment relationships are re-negotiated. A ready supply of quality labour contributes to the success of the independent production model. The industry is a magnet for talented, committed workers eager for work on the industry’s terms. These include being ready to depart to remote locations at a moment’s notice. However, as with Silicon Valley high-technology projects, much of the work is economically ‘clustered’, thereby facilitating fluidity of movement from one challenge to another. 

As Jones’s (1996) research affirms, people’s social behaviour reveals that several distinct stages can be observed over the course of a career in the film industry. At the ‘beginning’ stage, freelance employees are constantly vying to participate in an industry in which there are no clear rules for entry. As one grip/electrician explained: ‘‘‘There’s no tried and true way to get started. You have to find people you like who make movies . . . It’s getting the first job that is the hardest’’’ (Jones, 1996, p. 62). Once inside, the worker at the ‘crafting’ stage finds that, ‘You build your reputation every day. You’re only as good as your last job’ (pp. 64–5). Reputation matters, as careers are self-managed and advanced through successive ‘credits’ that span multiple, largely forgotten, temporary film-making companies. 

Having learned key skills and become indoctrinated into the industry culture, individuals enter a ‘navigating’ stage, furthering their reputation and developing the personal contacts that provide the resources to navigate from one project to another. In the words of one film commissioner, ‘‘‘We are a big industry but a small industry because we talk to one another’’’ (Jones, 1996, p. 65). It is through talking to each other that people gain access to experiences that both hone existing abilities and cultivate more complex skills. Eventually, successful careers go full circle and move to a ‘maintenance’ stage. Here, senior members of the industry identify and train new members, establish workshops that develop talent in the field, and co-ordinate events such as film festivals. During this period people address personal needs which may have been neglected during earlier career stages because of the necessity to survive in a relatively unforgiving industry. 

In a ‘weak’ environment that lasts a lifetime, it is critical that non-bureaucratic forms of cohesion bring order to the industry. Part of this cohesion is provided by subcontractors, whose processes of selection, training, and socialisation bring boundaryless careers together in project-based arrangements that provide tacit infrastructure and social familiarity. However, it is at the level of the individual career that we can most clearly see the micro-level behaviour that fills the relatively structure-less context. Despite the fact that no explicit rules or operating procedures exist there is much tacit communication that binds professionals together. The aggregate effects of individuals acting independently leads to macro-level cohesion. Shared understanding and related expectations, for example regarding the need for unusual working hours and the use of ‘idle’ time to teach newcomers professional skills, play a key role linking identities to workplace interactions. In the process of learning the ropes, individuals are socialised and begin to make key contacts that help progress them to the next stages of their career. Once socialised, people engage in collective learning as they problem-solve on a project-by-project basis. Learning accumulates, disperses, and evolves as industry specialists enact their working environment. 

From micro-level enactment we see macro-level influence and patterns, order and shape in the independent film industry. Not only do we observe distinct stages of careers, we see aggregate social norms influencing behaviour. What one can see from the pattern of progression that characterises freelance boundaryless careers in the film industry is that although few formal boundaries exist, persistent social structures and repeated patterns of interaction can be observed. In the process of enacting their careers, individuals engage in reinforcing the cohesive social patterns of the industry which serve to guide the stages of their development. In this respect careers in the Silicon Valley and the film industry have much in common, with organising in film-making resembling a ‘project-based’ Valley. Just as careers can be traced in the Valley through the development of technology and tightly knit project teams, in film a clear pattern also emerges that reveals micro-level organising shaping macro activity. 

Refinements on enactment 

Agency and communion

Both of our previous examples suggest that the enactment of boundaryless careers unfolds through a mixture of personal initiative and mutual co-operation. Marshall (1989), after Bakan (1966), refers to the elements in this mixture as agency and communion. At a very basic level agency is about control and communion is about co-operation. Agency is individualistic, and characterised by autonomy, independence, initiative, and adaptation. It is fundamental to boundaryless careers in that people are ultimately responsible for their own development. Communion, in contrast to agency, is concerned about connections, relationships, tolerance, and trust. It is fundamental to boundaryless careers in that people need to manage their own arrangements for working with others.1 

In ‘weak’ environments, in which rules are not defined and behavioural responses not controlled, both agency and communion are means by which people respond to uncertainty. Agency provides direction and drive to career behaviour and helps to diffuse ambiguity by providing vision and long-term goals. Left to its own means, however, agency may cause strong hierarchies to reform, the balance of power to be lost, and, most importantly, the trust and co-operation necessary for people and information to move across boundaries to be forfeited. Communion provides the platform for mutual support and collective learning through which shared visions may be pursued. However, unbridled communion may neglect to attend to the mechanisms and rewards through which effective collaboration can occur. 

The Silicon Valley and independent film-making examples illustrate the interplay of agency and communion. Agency occurs through the individual initiative and enthusiasm people bring to their careers within their adopted industries, communion occurs through the collaborative ways of working that substitute for more formal arrangements. Together, the combination of behaviours supports current high-technology or film-making projects while it simultaneously develops people for further opportunities. This development includes community-building that will influence the make-up and effectiveness of future project teams. Host industries will thrive, our examples suggest, as long as agency and communion are allowed to work in tandem (Rousseau & Arthur, 1999). 

Contemporary views of work frequently lament a loss of community in restructured employment arrangements. However, in calling for a return to community, these views frequently look no further than the single company. An enactment perspective suggests that communities can be much more broadly diffused. Both the Silicon Valley and film-making stories demonstrate that host industries, as well as their embedded occupations, provide alternative contexts for community-building to occur. Other kinds of community – stemming, for example, from shared ideological, family, educational, ethnic, or gender attachments – can also provide enduring support for people’s boundaryless career endeavours (Parker & Arthur, 2000). 

1	Some researchers, notably Marshall (1989), emphasise the feminine characteristics of communion versus the masculine characteristics of agency. We do not do so here, although it may be interesting to contemplate whether the Silicon Valley is, in the broadest sense, ‘feminised’. 

Reciprocity

A related concept is that of reciprocity. Since workers cannot be all things to all people all of the time, a balance of behaviours is required. Reciprocity refers to the connection between what people give to and what people take from their employment situations. Traditional career models used to prescribe that people offer loyalty in return for deferred rewards. Accordingly, deferred pension rights, vacation time, promotion opportunities, and social acceptance were most reserved for those who had ‘served their time’. In contrast, those who changed employer were handicapped by the loss of the privileges that they left behind. The Silicon Valley and film-making worlds suggest a different logic: one where the old entitlement-based models are a hindrance to boundaryless career investments. 

With boundaryless careers, employment relationships are too fluid to assume the trappings of traditional loyalty-based employment systems. In the simplest case, employment arrangements reflect a ‘spot’ contract involving a simple exchange of work for immediate financial payment. However, our examples suggest subtler forces are at work. People are recruited to participate in high-technology and film-making projects for the skills that they bring – skills that have been developed from previous projects. The system, at its best, consists of cycles in which the learning taken from previous projects is applied in the current project, which in turn provides new learning opportunities. The simple exchange of commitment to do one’s best in return for learning opportunities may be a common one in contemporary employment, and one that inspires many workers to seek new employment pastures when their learning slows down (Arthur, Inkson & Pringle, 1999). 

The concept of reciprocity reinforces the significance of project-based activities. Work which provides an underlying project-based structure, such as in construction (‘jobs’), law (cases), or computing (programmes), provides a particular time span for reciprocities to occur. If the benefits are genuinely mutual, projects provide a basis for high commitment from both parties to the short-term employment contract. Yet, the benefits of reciprocity can accrue beyond the project’s conclusion. Individuals can take their learning from projects and project participants with them. Meanwhile, their influence on other project participants can be retained in the sponsoring company, or the host industry, or both. Ultimately, other industries can also benefit as mobile workers transport best practices to new situations. 

A new continuity 

What general lessons can be claimed from our two examples? Many would argue that traditional employment systems, going back to the factories of the eighteenth century, do not favour boundaryless careers. We agree, but we also live in a time when those systems are failing, and where their underlying assumptions of stasis are incompatible with the emergent reality of persistent change. Moreover, those systems were designed according to a conception of ‘labour capital’ rather than to one of ‘intellectual capital’. Yet, it is the conception of intellectual capital that is increasingly emphasised today. Readers of this chapter will most likely see themselves as having a capacity for continuous learning. Is it really too great a step to extend the same belief in the capacity for learning to the workforce at large? 

If the workforce at large can learn, what are the social arrangements that best sustain new learning? Leaving the determination of what is to be learned to a few senior managers? Knowing what is best for people or trusting that they might know, or at least contribute to knowing, what is best for themselves? Having people trapped by deferred rewards (Williamson, 1975), or acknowledging that those rewards systems are grounded in distrust? 

A colleague recently visited the Czech republic, and explored that country’s relatively rapid adjustment to a market economy. She asked what was the single best thing a Czech worker could do to learn the underlying principles of the market. ‘Work for McDonalds,’ went the surprising reply, ‘but only for six months.’ It was explained that six months was quite long enough for the uninitiated worker to appreciate the importance of customers and customer service. After six months, the worker had learned what he or she could and it was time, from a career perspective, to move on. 

The contrast between working for McDonalds for six months or working for McDonalds for a lifetime is, writ large, the contrast between boundaryless careers and their traditional bounded counterparts. Today’s work is increasingly ‘intelligent’ work (Quinn, 1992), that calls on workers’ learning capacities, and – as our examples suggest – provides an organising structure rich in project opportunities through which learning episodes can unfold. If that organising structure is lacking, the worker can heed the advice of our Czech informant and design a project for herself or himself. 

In the future, we submit, most careers will be boundaryless. We have sought to illustrate the future by exploring two industries where boundaryless careers have flourished – reaping benefits for people, companies, and host industries alike. New theories, such as Karl Weick’s theory on the enactment of careers, can help us to understand the underlying patterns and dynamics inherent in complex, self-organising, social phenomena. People may not need to move between firms perpetually, but they will need to take charge of their own learning agendas. As they take charge, boundaries will form and re-form, and underlying order provide a macro-economic stability in an environment in which ‘organization man’ has become all but extinct. 

acknowledgements 

We are deeply indebted to Polly Parker of the University of Auckland, New Zealand, Anne Duncan and Svenja Tams of the London Business School, and Julian Smith for their feedback on an earlier draft of this chapter. Special thanks go to AnnaLee Saxenian, Candace Jones, and Karl Weick, authors of chapters in The boundaryless career in which these ideas were originally presented and on which the bulk of this text is based. 
   
   
      
         
            
               A Physics of Semantics?
            
            
               Each of the chapters of Investigations broaches new territory.
               Each is tentative and incomplete, pointing but not fully adequate.
               Yet, I persistently hope, it is better to light one candle against...what? the darkness? the veil beyond which we have had no framework of questions before?
               There are grounds, reasoned about by the best of philosophers and scientists of the past several centuries, to doubt a physics of semantics.
               We are on shaky ground.
               Yet when the first hard frost comes, when the birches have been swung, their crimson leaves scattered carelessly, when crystals splint shallow ponds and old egrets stand dark watch the coming dawn, long-legged, knowing how winter is thin, when the first phase transition of water to ice forms slight solidity across meadow streams, small creatures of flesh and concept tiptoe gingerly to some far side where, perhaps, something new is to be found.
            
            
               We have lacked a physical definition of an autonomous agent, able to manipulate the universe on its own behalfthe egret whose foreboding of winter leads to lifted wing and steady, powerful flight.
               The egret is as much a part of physical reality as the atom, and perhaps more than the vaunted quark.
               But autonomous agents, we who do daily manipulate the world on our own behalf, we to whom "intentionality" and "purpose" are so inevitably attributed by our common languages, we are, by my definition of autonomous agents, also nothing but physical systems with a peculiar organization of processes and properties.
               If the concept of autonomous agents were something like a usefulor more, a properdefinition of life itself, then autonomous agents span the gap from the merely physical to that new realm of the merely physical where "purpose" is ascribed by all of us to one another.
            
            
               Semantics enters with purpose.
               For this to be true, it is not necessary that the carriers of purpose, say, the same bacterium heading upstream in the glucose gradient, be conscious.
            
            
               I hope my definition of an autonomous agent is useful, an autocatalytic system carrying out a work cycle, now rather broadened by the realization that autonomous agents also do often detect and measure and record displacements of external systems from equilibrium that can be used to extract work, then do extract work, propagating work and constraint construction, from their environment.
            
            
               Know-how
            
            
               Bring ourselves empathetically and objectively back three billion years to the mixed microbial community flourishing right about where most of us are now, plus or minus a modicum of layers of surface crustal material.
            
            
               I want to say that the autonomous agents comprising that community had, individually and collectively, the embodied know-how to get on with making a living in the natural games that constituted their world.
               Indeed, as I have emphasized before, a biosphere is a self-consistent coconstruction of autonomous agents, ways of making a living, and the search procedures, mutation, recombination, as well as behavioral search open to autonomous agents.
               Those means of making a living that were well searched out and mastered by the agents and their search procedures became the kinds of "jobs" that were widely filled, the abundant niches of the bio-sphere.
               There is in this whole self-constructing system a wider know-how, beyond the know-how of any single autonomous agent spinning eagerly in its microenvironment.
               Yet, clearly, the know-how is distributed.
               There is no autonomous agent, no one, who knows how the whole system works, any more than anyone at present knows how the global economic system works in its myriad interactions, deals, steals, hopes, and frustrations.
            
            
               What in the world is "know-how"?
               Philosophers distinguish between "know-how" and "know that."
               I know how to tie my shoes and am learning how to play jazz drums.
               "Know that" concerns propositions, most conveniently, human propositions.
               I know that the moon isthey tell menot made of green cheese.
               I know that the earth circles the sun, that the earth is roughly spherical, that chairs are used to sit on.
               "Know that" brings with it the standard and nonstandard issues of the truth or falseness of propositions as they report states of the world.
               Perhaps higher primates who are trained to manipulate simple symbols with apparent reference to the world also can "know that" with respect to propositions.
            
            
               Unlike "know that," "know-how" does not involve propositions about the world.
               "Know-how" involves procedural knowledge about how to get on in the world.
               The cheetah streaking after the wildebeest, the athletic genius high jumping, have the know-how to do it.
            
            
               Does a bacterium know how to make a living in its world?
               I certainly want to say yes, without attributing consciousness in any way.
               Watch the myriad subtle turnings on and o of genes, metabolic switching, mechanical twitching, sensing of glucose gradient, swimming and tumbling upstream to higher glucose concentrations.
               It knows how all right, even if it cannot talk about how it gets on with its business.
               But then, try to talk about tying your shoes or the skilled driving when you become aware some dozens of miles down the road that you have accomplished the tasks without paying the slightest focused attention.
            
            
               Thank God for know-how.
               Know that is a thin veneer on a four-billion-year-old know-how skill abundant in the biosphere.
               But any autonomous agent proliferating alone or in a congery of other agents, it would seem, is also graced by the selfsame know-how.
               If we synthesize autonomous agents in the next decades and they coevolve under our rapt gaze over months or years into a modestly complex ecosystem brimming with novel life forms, they too will know how to make a living in their mutually created world plus the boundary conditions we more or less intelligently impose on them.
            
            
               The know-how is, in these terms, nothing but another view of the propagating closures of catalysis, work tasks, sensing, recording, and acting that we now recognize as inherent in the doings of autonomous agents.
               The know-how is not outside that propagating organization.
               The know-how is the propagating organization.
            
            
               Semantics
            
            
               All of which brings us, inevitably, to the brink of semantics.
            
            
               It is simple at its roots, you see.
               An incoming molecular species arriving in the interior of an autonomous agent really is (i) food; (ii) poison; (iii) a signal; (iv) neutral; (v) something else.
            
            
               Once there is an autonomous agent, there is a semantics from its privileged point of view.
               The incoming molecule is "yuck" or "yum."
               I think the major conceptual step to yuck or yum is unavoidable once there is an autonomous agent.
               And I think we have roughly the Darwinian criteria in mind.
               If yum, then there will probably be more of this type of agent, osprings of the first.
               If yuck, it is not so likely this lineage will prosper.
            
            
               Once yuck and yum, we are not far from C. S. Pierce's meaning-laden semiotic triad: sign, signified, significans.
               Like it or not, the glucose gradient is a sign, a predictor, of "more glucose that way."
               Granted, the glucose is not an arbitrary symbol, any more than a cloud is an arbitrary symbol of rain.
               In this restricted sense, signs are causally correlated with that which is signified.
               By contrast, the relation between the word "chair" and that which it signifies, and on which I am now sitting, is arbitrary.
               But can chemical signals in bacterial and plant and human communities be arbitrary from a chemical causal point of view?
               If so, can "mere chemicals" be signs in the full Piercean sense?
            
            
               I believe it is clear that mere chemistry in an autonomous agent can harbor symbols and signs in the full senses of the words.
               Consider first the famous genetic code.
               Triplets of nucleotides in an RNA molecule stand for specific amino acids that will end up incorporated into a protein.
               The detailed causal machinery involves transfer RNA molecules with their anticodon site and the distant site to which amino acids are attached, the aminoacyle transferase enzymes that charge the amino acid binding site of each transfer RNA with the proper amino acid among the twenty amino acids, the binding of the charged transfer RNA's anticodon site to the proper RNA code word triplet, the ribosome that glides between adjacent charged transfer RNA molecules and links the successive amino acids into the growing polypeptide chain that hangs free in the cytoplasm, tethered by the ribosome to the messenger RNA molecule as it is "translated."
            
            
               The arbitrariness of the genetic code is exemplified by the evolution of novel transfer RNA molecules, which translate a given messenger RNA code word triplet into a dierent amino acid.
               As J. Monod properly emphasized three decades ago in a slightly dierent context concerning activation and inhibition of enzymes at allosteric sites on the enzyme that are distant from the catalytic site, the relation of chemical structures that achieve control of catalysis are utterly arbitrary with respect to the chemical structures that undergo the catalysis.
               The same is true of the transfer RNA where the anticodon site is distant from the amino acid binding site.
               Because of this, which amino acid is charged onto a particular transfer RNA is utterly arbitrary and controlled by the aminoacyle transferase enzyme that does the charging, plus the structure of the amino acid binding site on the transfer RNA.
               Both of these can be altered without altering the anticodon-codon matching mechanism.
               In short, chemistry allows arbitrary organizations of control relations.
            
            
               It seems fully legitimate to assign the concepts of sign, signified, and significans to the genetic code.
               It seems legitimate to extend that notion to much of the subtle signaling, chemical and otherwise, within and between autonomous agents, as exemplified by plants that upon infestation by a particular insect secrete a secondary metabolite chemical that "warns" other members of the same species that an insect infestation is happening and to turn on defensive anti-insect secondary metabolites.
            
            
               The calculus that is Claude Shannon's elegant information theory has always been about reduction of uncertainty about the statistics of the source of a set of symbols.
               Nowhere in the core of Shannon's work concerning the encoding and transmission of information does the meaning, or semantics, of the information enter.
               This is no criticism, and is widely known and appreciated.
               There is, however, just a hint of semantics in Shannon's view that the semantics resides in the "decoder."
            
            
               I cannot buy Shannon's view unless the decoder is an autonomous agent.
               If not, then the decoder merely transforms a bit string sent along a communication channel into some other discrete or continuous dynamicsperhaps a set of water-filled bowls is drained by turning on a machine that opens valves between the bowls and to the outside world in particular ways.
               The patterns of bowl drainage upon receipt of the binary string messages sent along the communication channel constitutes the decoding.
            
            
               But if the recipient is an autonomous agent such as a bacterium and the incoming molecule is a symbol-sign of a paramecium or an amoeba on the roam and the bacterium swims away and avoids becoming dinner, that sequence of events seems laden with semantics.
               If only the bacterium could tell us: "Did you see that truck of a paramecium coming at me?
               I've run into that one before!
               I ducked under a boulder, and he never sensed me.
               I made it home.
               Pass me some more glucose please, Martha."
            
            
               I will return in the next chapter to discuss such stories, for I will say that we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and, therefore, cannot deduce that which will unfold.
               Thus, among other things, we must tell stories to understand the oriented actions of agents in their worlds.
               Do not be overly quick to accuse me of anthropomorphizing.
               I too know the risks, including the common claim that we can always in principle translate from "intentional talk" to the fully predictive causal account of the events in question.
               But patience.
               Not only are we unable to prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and predict what will unfold, but we also cannot even translatein the sense of necessary and sucient conditionsfrom legal talk to normal intentional talk, let alone from legal talk of Henderson found guilty of murder to a physical talk about sound-wave forms monitored and masses at space-time lines as a description.
            
            
               Then let's just be naive for the moment.
               The semantics of the yuck or yum coming into a simple autonomous agentsay, an early bacteriumis somehow linked with the embodied know-how of that agent in making a living, or failing to make a living, in its world.
               The semantics of an event is some subset of the fully embroidered, context-dependent set of causal implications of the event, or signal, in question.
            
            
               "For want of a nail, the shoe was lost; for want of the shoe, the horse was lost; and for want of the horse, the rider was lost," more or less, said Benjamin Franklin.
               The semantics of the nail is some subset of this embroidered context-dependent set of implications of the event, or signal, in question to the autonomous agents in the coevolving system.
            
            
               It seems hard to ascribe purpose, in the sense of acting on its own behalf, to a stone or a chair and easy with respect to an alga.
               Of course, there is a sense in which my attribution of semantics to autonomous agents is purely tautological.
               After all, I began by stating that a bacterium swimming upstream in the glucose gradient was acting on its own behalf in an environment, defined an autonomous agent as a physical system able to act on its own behalf, then asked what a physical system must be such that it can act on its own behalf.
               Now, five chapters later, it is hardly an independent deduction that autonomous agents are the proposed organization of matter, energy, and organization to which purposes can be ascribed in the sense of being able to act on their own behalf.
               My definition is a definitional circle.
            
            
               On the other hand, while the definition is circular, like F = MA and Darwin's "natural selection" and "fitness," that does not mean that the set of codefined concepts surrounding my definition of an autonomous agent as a reproducing system that does a work cycle fails to touch the real world.
               Stones and chairs are not, by my definition, autonomous agents.
               All living cells are.
               And the stunning fact directly before us, every day, is that autonomous agents do manipulate the world on their own behalf.
               Watch a pair of nesting birds build their nest.
            
            
               In short, once we have autonomous agents and yuck and yum, it appears that semantics enters the universe as the agents coevolve and behave on their own behalf with one another in the unfolding of a biosphere.
            
            
               Knowing
            
            
               What about "knowing"?
            
            
               Daniel Dennett, in his fine book Darwin's Dangerous Idea , advances a hierarchy of forms of "knowing," if I may use that term, that have arisen in evolution by Darwinian means.
               I find his hierarchy congenial and informative.
               Dennett envisions evolution as a sequence of kinds of construction cranes that bit by bit build up higher-order entities via variation and natural selection.
            
            
               I do not disagree, although I have placed far greater emphasis on the roles of self-organization in evolution.
               Here, in Investigations , I am trying to point at the mysterious but utterly natural hopefulness in which an increasing diversity of broken symmetries in the universe creates the diversity of structures and processes that can constitute and identify ramified and ramifying sources of energy, detect those sources of energy, create devices and processes that couple to those sources of energy, and generate yet more diversity that propagates macroscopic order even further.
               I wonder, in short, at the naturalness and self-generaticity of Dennett's cranes building cranes building cranes in biospheres, perhaps planetary geologies, and beyond.
            
            
               But back to the past.
               Dennett distinguishes "Darwinian creatures," "Pavlovian creatures," "Popperian creatures," and "Gregorian creatures."
               A simple autonomous agent, say, a bacterium, is a Darwinian creature.
               In its simplest version, the creature evolves by mutation, also recombination and natural selection.
               For the moment, no behavioral learning is to be considered.
               So one (or a colony or an ecosystem) of Darwinian creatures adapts more or less as Darwin told us.
            
            
               At the next level up, say, aplysia, a nervous system is present, and the creature is capable of stimulus-response learning, á la Pavlov.
               Indeed, aplysia can learn very simple conditioned stimulithe later analogue is the bell causing the dog to salivate in "expectation" of food.
            
            
               At the next level (Dennett, perhaps properly, reserves this for us vertebrates) is the Popperian creature.
               Popperian creatures, in Dennett's fine phrase, have "internal models" of their world and can "run the internal model" with the clutch disengaged, rather than running the model in real time in the real world.
               This allows us lucky Popperian creatures to allow our "hypotheses to die in our stead."
               I love that image.
            
            
               Beyond the Popperian is the Gregorian creaturenamely, at least humans.
               Dennett makes the wonderful argument that we utilize our toolsliterally stone knives, arrows, digging sticks, machine toolsto enlarge our shared world of facts and processes.
               This enlarged shared world gives us more know-how, and more know that.
               Cultural evolution, at some point, begins to burst out-of-bounds.
               Hard rock music jangles the minarets of Iran.
               Who knows what new cultural forms will blossom?
               Chinese cooking lands in Cuba, and Cuban-Chinese cuisine is invented.
               What's next under the sun?
               Who can say?
            
            
               I very much like Dennett's ladder of know-how, and eventual know that.
               Without invoking consciousness, not because it is not worth invoking but because so little sensible has ever been said on the subject, it seems worth asking how much of this hierarchy could be realized by simple molecular systems, even without evoking nerve cells.
            
            
               I would think a lot of this hierarchy could find molecular realizations.
               For example, bacteria and amoebae do have a kind of Pavlovian learning already, for they have receptors that accommodate to a constant level of a given signal ligand and sense instead a change from the current level.
               This is not yet the association of a more or less arbitrary conditioned stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus, but I can imagine chemistry to accomplish the latter.
               As neurons are supposed to proliferate and form novel synaptic connections that survive if used and to mediate the linkage of conditioned to unconditioned stimulus, why not envision a complex chemistry, say, very complex carbohydrate-synthesis patterns sustained by complex sets of enzymes whose activities are modulated by the dierent carbohydrates themselves, which is true of contemporary carbohydrate metabolism.
               Such a system might blindly try out variant patterns of synthesis until it could establish a self-sustaining web linking the carbohydrates, the enzymes, and certain protein receptors mediating the linkage between unconditioned and conditioned stimulus, then maintain that linkage by positive feedback loops.
               The image is not too far from how it is imagined that "idiotype" and "anti-idiotype" immune networks work to sustain synthesis of a set of desired antibodies against an incoming pathogen.
               In such networks, for which there is modestly good evidence, a given first antibody serves as an antigen that stimulates the body to produce a second antibody that binds to the unique amino acid sequences, called the "idiotype" of the first antibody.
               In turn, the second "anti-idiotype" antibody stimulates a third, which stimulates a fourth.
               But this series is likely to form feedback loops because the first and third antibody can often both bind to the same site on the second antibody, hence, the first and third antibodies are similar shapes in shape space.
               It is not much of a stretch to think of the immune system as a conditioned stimulus response system.
            
            
               Popperian creatures?
               Why cannot the molecular-sensing and hypothesis-testing churning concerns of the bacterium as it senses a paramecium churn twenty cycles before kicking in the rotary motor, or not, such that the wee bacterium hides under a boulder of a grain of sand until the beast passes by?
               Are nerves necessary?
               Plants, as noted, are said to signal one another with complex secondary metabolites to characterize the particular kinds of insects infesting the glade.
               There are arbitrary structural relations between the metabolite and the insect, just as symbols in human language are often arbitrary with respect to the signified.
               Not bad for nerveless nonvertebrates.
            
            
               I do get stuck at Gregorian creatures.
               Even here, the free and open creating of new symbol strings in a language, wherever new sentences can be created, is not that fundamentally dierent from the persistent open creation of new kinds of molecules in the biosphere as a whole.
               If the conversation we recent two-legged ones are having with respect to our digging sticks and atomic bombs is impressive, so too is the chemical conversation in any full-fledged ecosystem, where we are all instrumental in the lives of one another.
            
            
               I suppose I am naively driven to consider that the biosphere, with its urgent diversity in which, emboldened by all our know-how, we do get on with a very rich conversation, may very early already have harbored all the levels of which Dennett speaks.
               We humans are just more gregarious with our vocal cords and e-mail, I guess.
               Smart place, a biosphere, lots to talk about.
               Four billion years of yammering.
               Slapstick comedy may have started a long time ago.
            
            
               Ethics
            
            
               And what of ethics?
               Does a whiff of ethical issue arise with autonomous agents?
               Yuck or yum from my point of view if I am an autonomous agent.
               There are deep reasons for caution.
               Hume told us long ago about the "naturalistic fallacy": One cannot deduce "ought" from "is."
               From the fact that mothers care for their young, we cannot deduce that they ought to do so, Hume argued.
               From the fact that Hitler set out to conquer Europe and more and to kill Jewry, we cannot deduce that he ought to have done so.
            
            
               Indeed, Hume's injunction underlies the caution of scientists about making ethical statements.
               We scientists find the facts.
               You citizens across the globe can argue the ethics.
               But if Hume warns us not to deduce ought from is, where do values come from at all?
               Hume's injunction against deduction from is to ought nevertheless began by recognizing the legitimacy of the category "ought."
            
            
               The eorts following Hume to understand the meaning of ethical assertions have been long, twisted, arduous.
               Following the dictates of the logical positivists of the Vienna Circle that only those statements capable of verification were meaningful, philosophers as famous as G. E. Moore came to wonder if ethical assertions were merely emotive utterances.
               "It is wrong to kill."
               Becomes, "Agggah!"
               Does the positivist argument seem persuasive?
               It has always amused me that the core injunction of the logical positivists, "only those statements that are empirically verifiable are meaningful," is itself not empirically verifiable.
               One is reminded of something about hoisting and petards.
            
            
               John Rawls of Harvard has argued eloquently that our human notions of fairness derive from what we would all "contractually" agree to, were we to know before birth that we would all be born with diering abilities and endowments.
               Thus "equality before the law" is one contract that Rawls commends to us.
               "Equality before the law" is far more refined than the yuck or yum of the bacterium.
               The emergence of ethics in the evolution of life on this planet is a fascinating issue.
            
            
               I will content myself with wondering where "value" and the rudiments of "intentionality" come from in the physical universe in the first place and leave social contracts for other eorts.
               Where is the place of value in a world of fact?
            
            
               So, a short soliloquy.
               Facts are know-that statements.
               But know-how preceded know that.
               While fully aware of Hume's injunction, I think that from the autonomous agent's perspective, yuck or yum is primary, unavoidable, and of the deepest importance to that agent.
               I suppose we apply the Darwinian criteria.
               Too much yuck, this one and its progeny are gone from the future of the biosphere.
               Without attributing consciousness to an E. coli , or an autonomous agent we may create in the near future, I cannot help but feel that the rudiments of value are present once autonomous agents are around.
            
            
               And again without attributing consciousness, once an autonomous agent is around is the rudiment of intentionality present?
               If so, another cornerstone of ethical activity has been laid.
               Ethical behavior requires first the logical possibility of behavior for which one is responsible.
               You are not responsible for acts and eects beyond your control.
               To act ethically, you must first be able to act at all.
            
            
               But what are "acts" in the first place?
               Daniel Yamins is a brilliant young mathematician.
               Now entering Harvard, Dan spent a summer with me at the Santa Fe Institute before he learned to drive, after an earlier summer spent in the laboratory of Jack Szostak at Harvard, where, at age fourteen, Dan was learning to evolve RNA molecules to bind arbitrary ligands.
               Dan and I struggled that summer to make the distinction between the "doings" of an autonomous agent and mere happenings in and around the autonomous agent.
               Note we say the E. coli is swimming upstream in the glucose gradient to get dinner.
               But all sorts of molecular vibrational, rotational, and translational motions are occurring.
               What are actions and what are mere happenings?
            
            
               I do not think we were successful in drawing a clean distinction between doings and happenings with clear mathematics.
               But I sense that the distinction between doings and happenings, Dan's happy phrasing, is relevant for E. coli , tigers, us, trees, and autonomous agents in general.
               We will meet a similar problem in the next chapter when we attempt to distinguish between the function of a part of an organism and the other causal consequences of that part of the organism.
            
            
               Strange and interesting, is it not, that these issues all seem to arise with autonomous agents but not otherwise?
               Granted that we here seem to confront the language game circularity alluded to earlier, yet I do truly think that the rudiments of semantics, intentionality, value, and ethics arise with autonomous agents.
               I do not think those rudiments suce to jump over Hume's naturalistic fallacy.
               We cannot deduce ought from is in any concrete context, but I think we have the categories of ought and is in the physical universe once we have autonomous agents.
            
         
      
   




Zoot Suit
A style of suit worn by African Americans, Filipino Americans, and Mexican Americans during the 1930s and 1940s. In Chicano culture this style of dress is primarily associated with the pachucos of the 1940s. The fashion at that time was to wear very baggy pants with pegged legs, long jackets with high and sharp shoulder pads, thick-soled shoes, and long watch chains dangling from the belt. An addition to the whole style common to Chicanos was a particular haircut, long with a ducktail and a wide-brimmed hat.
The word zoot was known within the urban jazz culture of Harlem, and it meant something either exaggerated in performance or in style. Many African Americans wore an extravagant style of clothing, the baggy pegged pants and jackets with padded shoulders, that later became known as the zoot suit. In the novel Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison, he describes the zoot--suiters’ style, “walking slowly, their shoulders swaying, their legs swinging from their hips in trousers that ballooned upward from cuffs fitting snug about their ankles; their coats long and hip-tight with shoulders far too broad to be those of natural western men” (1947, 380). In the late-night jazz scenes of Harlem this style was “a killer-diller coat with a drape-shape, reat-pleats and shoulders padded like a lunatic’s cell” (380). Tyler makes the point that the zoot suit was an extremely symbolic costume, which gave the wearer the look of a child in adult clothing. The broad square shoulders gave a macho look to the youth, and the finger-tipped coat was made for fun and leisure. The long baggy pants were made for dancing, especially the jitterbug, and the wide Panama hats were another sign of adulthood. “The business of fun, dancing and dating were the key characteristics displayed by Zoot-Suiters. It was an escape from drudgery and futile labor to the bliss of free-wheeling movement in the city among youths in the new youth culture” (Tyler, 23). Prominent black entertainers wore the zoot suit, such as Cab Calloway, Sammy Davis Jr., and Duke Ellington. Ellington performed at the Orpheum in Los Angeles in 1941 and 1942 with a musical called Jump for Joy in which the performers wore zoot suits, also known as Gone with the Wind suits, after the style worn by Clark Gable in the movie by the same name.
Even though the zoot suit was worn by the young men of several different races and ethnicities, it is primarily identified with the pachucos of Los Angeles. Pachucos were mostly second-generation Mexicans, the sons of migrant laborers and working-class immigrants. Pachucos created their own subculture, an arrogant style of dressing, a bilingual secret argot, and for some individuals membership in petty criminal gangs. The zoot suit became a symbolic disguise that identified the zoot-suiter as neither a Mexican nor an American. It was not a bicultural or binational position, but rather a position between cultures, a “hanging in space” position. The overly confident, slow swagger of the pachuco, today exemplified by the cholo, made it appear in fact as if the zoot-suiter were walking on air.
During the summer of 1943 the attention of the whole country was on Los Angeles when gangs of sailors and zoot-suiters battled with each other in the streets of the city. It is unclear if this was a race riot or a riot of patriotic sailors who attacked, beat, and stripped young Mexican Americans whom they perceived to be unpatriotic zoot-suiters. Between the third and thirteenth of June zoot-suiters were open targets. Much has been written about these riots from both literary and historical perspectives.
During the late 1970s the zoot suit received wide recognition and popularity with the production of a successful play by Luis Valdez. In 1981 a film by the same name, Zoot Suit, was produced and directed by Luis Valdez, with performances by actors Daniel Valdez and Edward James Olmos.
See also Cholos; Pachucos
Zozobra
A giant, forty-foot effigy in the form of a puppet, which is burned during the annual Santa Fe Fiesta held in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The word Zozobra translates to “gloom” or “worry” or “anguished.” The Zozobra is ritualistically burned at the beginning of the fiesta, which symbolizes the end of destructiveness, gloom, and worry, setting the tone for a successful fiesta. The creation of Zozobra was introduced into the fiesta in 1926 by Will Shuster, who felt that the fiesta had become “dull and commercialized.” Throughout the years the image of Zozobra changed from a simple twenty-foot puppet to the elaborate forty-foot figure with animated eyes, arms, and mouth that he is today. In 1969 Shuster turned over the responsibility and copyright of Zozobra to the Kiwanis Club of Santa Fe. He is hung on a tall pole on a hill, outside the city, where the burning can be seen by the thousands of people who come to watch. The death of gloom is supposed to resurrect happiness.
In response to the tradition of the burning of Zozobra, a group of New Mexico Chicanos started a tradition of burning El Kookoóee, a figure known by many Chicanos as the bogeyman, during the Festival de Otoño.
See also El Kookoóee; Santa Fe Fiesta














three
style


When an architectural competition was announced for the New York Public Library on May 21, 1897, Dr. John Shaw Billings, the library’s executive director, was determined that in his building, design would not triumph over function. He had in mind Boston’s newly built public library, a beautiful but in his opinion poorly functioning building. Billings, an ex-army physician, was responsible for organizing the Surgeon General’s Library and a celebrated medical index. He was also an expert in hospital design, and was thus familiar with building construction. He drafted a plan for the new library whose most unorthodox feature was the location of the main reading room. It was not located near the main entrance, as was common practice, but on an upper floor, above the book stacks.
The terms of the architectural competition were strict and included detailed floor plans that the competitors were required to follow. There were two stages, intended to attract new talent as well as established firms. First, six architects were chosen from an open competition. These six then advanced to a second stage, where they competed against six invited firms that included not only McKim, Mead & White (the architects of the Boston Public Library), but also such luminaries as Peabody & Stearns, George B. Post, and an up-and-coming young firm, Carrère & Hastings. The up-and-comers carried the day. McKim, much to his chagrin, not only lost but placed third behind Howard & Cauldwell. It was his own fault, since he imperiously ignored the suggested plan and substituted his own arrangement. Carrère & Hastings conscientiously followed Billings’ requirements.
The projected budget for the new library was not large ($1.7 million) and Billings expected a relatively modest building.* That was not what he got. All three designs were monumental. Carrère & Hastings and Howard & Cauldwell used the Modern French style, which was more ornate and allowed for more articulation to the façade than the austere Classical style that McKim opted for. All incorporated giant columns rising the full height of the two floors—Corinthian in McKim’s case, Ionic in the other two (the completed building is Corinthian). The compositional strategies were roughly similar: a monumental stair led to an elevated main floor; the entrance was placed in the center (more understated in McKim’s elegant design); statuary and urns adorned the attic. All three entrants shared a sense of what was beautiful and what was appropriate, and all were concerned with conveying the same message of permanence, dignity, and of culture rooted in the past.
I mentioned the New York Public Library competition when I gave a public lecture in connection with a recent architectural competition for the new Salt Lake City Public Library. The library board had conducted a national search for an architect, visited new libraries across the country, and solicited proposals from prominent architects. They had narrowed their list to four firms: Charles Gwathmey and Robert Siegel are respected New York architects with a long record of university buildings and museums, including a new library of science, industry, and business for the New York Public Library system. Moshe Safdie had built major civic buildings in Israel, Canada, and the United States, and recently completed the public library in Vancouver, British Columbia. Moore Ruble Yudell is a Los Angeles firm founded by the late Charles Moore, with whom John Ruble and Buzz Yudell built several university libraries and a public library in Berlin. Will Bruder, the least well-known of the four, is a southwesterner and the architect of the new, well-regarded Phoenix Public Library.
I told my audience that I thought that the Salt Lake City library board would have a more difficult choice than their nineteenth-century New York counterparts. It was not a question of function. The Salt Lake City librarians had prepared an equally exhaustive program of requirements, so whichever architect was chosen commodity probably would be well served. As for firmness, I was reasonably sure that any of these experienced firms would build soundly. It was the consideration of delight that would make the selection harder. Gwathmey and Siegel design crisply detailed, understated buildings in a latter-day version of the International Style. Safdie, too, is a modernist, but he follows in the footsteps of Pei, and his buildings are frankly monumental—the Vancouver library had been likened to the Roman Coliseum. Moore Ruble Yudell’s work is different. Informal and animated, their eclectic Postmodern designs are likely to include ornament and architectural motifs drawn from their surroundings. Bruder, on the other hand, designs chic buildings that incorporate exposed structural elements, rough industrial materials, and sleek details. Building on the same site, fulfilling the same functional requirements, and using the same up-to-date construction technology, the four firms would produce libraries that would look different.
The library board awarded the commission to Moshe Safdie, and a year later the plans for the new building were unveiled. The new library will feature an unusual triangular-shaped main building and a curving wall-like structure that encloses a public square. A hundred years ago, it was taken for granted that the New York Public Library would be designed in some variant of the Classical style. Today a public library can take many guises. It can be relentlessly avant-garde, like the new $1.5 billion national library in Paris, where the books are housed in four L-shaped 22-story glass towers, and the readers are lodged in underground rooms, which the London Times described as “a series of rectangular salons (identical of course) where you can admire the ultra-smooth gray concrete, steel grille ceilings and the expanses of African veneer.”1 A new library can be comfortably Modernist, like the new British Library in London, which the Independent humorously described as “a giant municipal building that has made its way from Scandinavia, having crashed headfirst through an English brickworks on the way.”2 Tom Beeby’s handsome Harold T. Washington Library in Chicago, on the other hand, is distinctly old-fashioned, with rusticated stone walls and carved brick ornaments that are a literal evocation of the city’s nineteenth-century architectural tradition. Instead of trendy plastic or metal chairs, the reading areas are equipped with solid wood tables and traditional courthouse chairs. James Ingo Freed’s Main Public Library in San Francisco, on the other hand, is both old and new: the imposing granite and stainless steel exterior is more or less Classical on one façade, and more or less Modernist on another.
The coexistence of different architectural styles is nothing new. In a 1913 essay titled “Style in American Architecture,” Ralph Adams Cram identified no less than seven contemporary styles, although he called them “tendencies.” Five were traditional: McKim’s pure Classicism; the Beaux-Arts French Modern; Colonial, which was associated with houses but was also appearing in larger buildings such as the Johns Hopkins University campus; Cram’s own High Gothic; and a looser interpretation of the medieval style as practiced by his partner Goodhue. Two were new: steel-frame construction, which Cram described as an enfant terrible; and what he called the Secessionists—Frank Lloyd Wright in Chicago, the Greene brothers in Pasadena—who exhibited “a strongly developed enmity to archaeological forms of any kind.” Cram was not sanguine about the future, but he nevertheless concluded: “Chaos then confronts us, in that there is no single architectural following, but legion; and in that fact lies the honor of our art, for neither is society one, or ever at one with itself.”3
Cram is right: most historical periods are marked by stylistic confusion; it is stylistic consensus that is unusual. There was such a brief consensus in the late 1890s, when both architects and the American public, under the influence of the immensely popular World’s Columbian Exposition, embraced Classicism, at least for public buildings. That unanimity lasted long enough for the New York Public Library competition, but it began to unravel shortly after, as Cram’s essay makes clear. There was also a consensus in the 1920s, at least among progressive architects. That consensus did not last either. After 1940, Mies van der Rohe gave up the free-flowing plans and asymmetrical massing that had characterized the Barcelona Pavilion and the Tugendhat House, and began designing buildings whose details and materials were Modern but whose layout and composition were distinctly Classical. In the 1920s, Le Corbusier proclaimed the “Five Points of a New Architecture”: the building raised on stilts; the roof garden; the frame structure that allowed a free plan; the free façade; and the horizontal ribbon window. He, too, had second thoughts. Thirty years later, his wonderful chapel at Ronchamps had massive sculpted wall that concealed a concrete frame; the roof, far from being flat, resembled a billowing nun’s coif. Le Corbusier, who had coined the famous expression, “a house is a machine for living in,” now adopted distinctly un-machinelike building materials such as crudely finished concrete, exposed brick, roughened stucco, and fieldstone. This volte face gave rise to the so-called Brutalist style, which had a worldwide influence, shaping the work of architects as dissimilar as James Stirling and Paul Rudolph, and ultimately opening the door to Postmodern stylistic experiments such as Charles Moore’s little house in the Berkeley hills.
The inconstancy of the International Style practitioners should have been expected. The history of Western architecture is of architects searching for rules, only to bend and break them. Even Classicism, which appears at first glance to be highly regimented, is not immune. As far as we know, the ancient Greeks used only three orders: Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. Vitruvius describes them, and also refers to a Tuscan order, which is a Roman invention. Roman, too, is the so-called Composite order, an ornate blend of Ionic and Corinthian. The vault, the arch, and the dome, unknown to the Greeks, were other Roman additions to the Classic canon. Architects have been stretching Classical rules ever since: breaking pediments, flattening pilasters, magnifying and shrinking columns, rusticating masonry. A sixteenth-century French architect, Philibert de l’Orme, invented a French order; Edwin Lutyens devised an order based on Mughal precedents for the Viceroy’s House in New Delhi; more recently, Allan Greenberg created an order for the offices of the Secretary of State that incorporated the Great Seal of the United States. Michael Graves designed Classical caryatids (columns carved in the shape of human figures) to support the pedimented front of an office building for the Walt Disney Company in Burbank. While the supports of the porch of the Erechtheon in Athens take the form of graceful maidens, Graves’ caryatids are the Seven Dwarfs.
The headquarters of a company whose logo is a pair of mouse ears obviously demands a different decorum from a temple. In the past, religious buildings and palaces required a narrow stylistic range. As architectural commissions grew to include civic and commercial buildings, warehouses, factories, shops and cinemas, houses and weekend houses—every sort of building—a single style no longer sufficed. Gothic is an evocative style for churches, but despite Walpole’s efforts it is ill-adapted to houses. Romanesque makes imposing city halls, but is too heavy to be applied to skyscrapers. The International Style makes striking small buildings but monotonous large ones. Shingle Style cottages are pleasing; a Shingle Style Home Depot is ridiculous. As Cram wisely observed, “Architecture is nothing unless it is intimately expressive, and if utterly different things clamor for voicing, different also must be their architectural manifestation.”4
The great architects—Brunelleschi, Palladio, Wren, Richardson, Lutyens—regularly looked to the past for inspiration. In 1965, Richard Meier built the Smith House, which has been called the first International Style revival building. Like all revivalists, Meier picks and chooses. At first glance, the Smith House has all the stylistic hallmarks of a Le Corbusier villa of the 1920s: a free plan, flat roof, white walls, pipe railings, horizontal ribbon windows, a ramp. Yet it is built out of wood and steel, not masonry. The white walls are painted wood siding, not stucco; the details are more refined, the plate-glass sheets are larger, the structure lighter. The result is an International Style that is filtered through American consciousness and shaped by American technology. It is like Thomas Jefferson building Classical columns out of wood—the same, but different.
Although art historians use terms like Gothic Revival and Greek Revival to distinguish later reincarnations of styles, architects look at history differently. “For the serious architect the past exists not as a legacy to be possessed through a self-conscious act of the ‘modern’ will,” writes Roger Scruton in The Aesthetics of Architecture, “but as an enduring fact, an ineliminable part of an extended present.”5 That is why architects, whether they are Inigo Jones or Louis Kahn, make architectural pilgrimages to the Mediterranean roots of Western architecture. Sketchbook in hand, they plumb the secrets of the master builders of the past. Consciousness of the past may also explain why architects tend to resist being categorized according to style; they instinctively understand that the history of architecture—including the present—is a continuity rather than a series of episodes.
Stylistic consistency is much admired today, but it was not always so. In 1419, Filippo Brunelleschi began the Foundling Hospital in Florence, whose delicate arcade of Corinthian columns surmounted by pedimented windows is generally considered the first building of the Renaissance. At the very same time, he was building a great dome over the crossing of the cathedral of Florence in a style that was not Classical but distinctly Gothic, pointed arches and all. The German architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel is best known for his severe Classical public buildings such as the superb Altes Museum in Berlin, but he also worked in other styles: Gothic in churches, and picturesque Italianate in villas. McKim, Mead & White favored the Classical style for public buildings and palatial residences, but built Norman parish churches, Shingle Style summer retreats, French Renaissance mansions, and American Colonial country houses. John Russell Pope, an eclectic master, designed beautiful picturesque Tudor, Georgian, and Colonial country estates. Edwin Lutyens was another Classicist whose residential work was eclectic.
Domestic architects had to be adaptable, because house styles changed according to fashion. In the United States, Tudor was popular in the 1900s, as was the Free Style; Cotswold and French Provincial appeared in the 1920s. After the 1930s, influenced by the restoration of Williamsburg, American Colonial returned to favor. The Cotswold style, with its relatively severe details and blunt forms, created a very different setting from French Provincial, which tended to have more delicate details, from Free Style with its almost rustic atmosphere, or from sturdy Colonial. Since historic styles carry cultural overtones, using different styles was also a way for architects—and clients—to say different things.
If architectural style is a language—an analogy that is deeply flawed—it is closer to slang than to grammatical prose. Architectural styles are mutable, unregulated, improvised. Architects break the rules, and invent new ones. In part, this is simply the irrepressible urge of creative individuals. In part, architects break stylistic rules because they can. After all, most of the rules that govern building design—fire codes, building codes, zoning laws, budgets, programmatic requirements, engineering norms—are outside the architect’s control; stylistic rules are firmly within his purview. Since architecture is so intensely competitive, doing something unexpected, unusual, or just different is a way to be noticed, to rise above the crowd.
In addition to historical styles, there have also been styles associated with individual architects. The Palladian style made its way from Andrea Palladio to Inigo Jones, from him to Colen Campbell and Lord Burlington, and thence to Thomas Jefferson. It reappears in the work of contemporary Classicists such as Allan Greenberg. H. H. Richardson’s influence was considerably shorter-lived, but for at least 20 years Richardsonian Romanesque rolled over the United States like an “aesthetic Juggernaut,” in Cram’s colorful phrase. Mies van der Rohe’s steel-and-glass style likewise prevailed for more than two decades, and his characteristic I-beam window mullion can still be seen in contemporary curtain walls.
Buildings like Jones’ Palladian Queen’s House in Greenwich, Adler & Sullivan’s Richardsonian Romanesque Auditorium Building in Chicago, and Gordon Bunshaft’s Miesian Lever House are not copies but satisfying originals. However, most personal styles are not easily adaptable. A building in Wright’s unmistakable Prairie style, for example, simply looks like a knock-off. Some personal styles are simply too obsessive, which is probably why Frank Furness and the equally idiosyncratic Barcelona architect Antonio Gaudí never attracted a following.
Inigo Jones consciously based his work on the architecture of Palladio, but he did not think of himself as working in the Palladian “style,” any more than Palladio would have referred to the Classical “style.” Although Renaissance architects described their architecture as all’antica—in the antique manner—they took it for granted that the history of architecture was a progression: the Romans improved on the Greeks, and they would improved on the Romans. According to the architecture historian Peter Collins, the use of the word style to designate the architecture of a particular period or country is relatively late. He cites James Stuart and Nicholas Revett’s Antiquities of Athens, published in 1762 and credited with inaugurating the Classical Revival in England. The authors, both architects, referred to “the Grecian and Roman style of building.”6
The Latin root of “style” is stilus. A stilus was the sharp-pointed tool used to write on wax tablets and, by inference, stilus also referred to the way that something was written. This sense of technique carried over to English, and the original meaning of style was those features of literary composition that belonged to the form rather than to the substance of the matter being expressed. The seventeenth-century English musical composer Samuel Wesley put it neatly: “Style is the dress of thought.” Jacques-François Blondel, who was Louis XV’s architect and who founded the first full-time school of architecture in Europe in 1750, adopted this literary meaning as a metaphor and described architectural style as a building’s character—for example, rustic, regal, or heroic. “Style in the organization of façades and in the decoration of rooms is the poetry of architecture,” he taught his students, “which alone makes all the architect’s compositions truly interesting.”7
Literary style described the way that something was written, expressed, or performed. Architectural style, in Blondel’s sense, describes the way that something was built. Although architecture is often defined in terms of abstractions such as space, light, and volume, buildings are above all physical artifacts. The experience of architecture is palpable: the grain of wood, the veined surface of marble, the cold precision of steel, the textured pattern of brick. But exactly what do we see when we look at brickwork? We see the joints between the bricks and the mortar (which can be flush, or scraped out to create shadows; the bonding patterns; the way that the bricks turn the corner; the surrounding of openings; and the connection between the brick wall and the foundation or the eaves. What we see are details.
Details are a major preoccupation of the architect. Once the overall form of a building is determined—“the masterly, correct, and magnificent play of masses brought together in light”—there remains the question not only of what materials are to be used and how these will be assembled, but also of how the hundreds of parts of the building are to be designed: from the door frames and the window sills to the railings and the baseboards.
The function of a baseboard is to cover the joint between the wall and the floor, and secondarily to protect the wall from scuffing. There are dozens of ways that this can be done. Baseboards can be prominent or discreet, a complicated assembly of board, cap and base, or a simple strip of hardwood. Or nothing—many modern architects dispense with baseboards altogether. The baseboards in my living room are twelve inches tall. They are not wood but cast iron, since they are really disguised radiators. My house was built in 1908, influenced by the British Free Style of Voysey and Baillie Scott, and to further preserve a simple, rustic atmosphere the architect had the baseboards/radiators painted to resemble wood.
Railings have a simple function—they must be sturdy enough to support us if we lean on them, and they must provide a secure hand-hold: if railings are open, the spaces between the supports and the rails should be small enough to prevent children from falling through. Classical railings, developed during the Renaissance, consist of balusters supporting a handrail. Balusters—little columns—can have a single or a double swelling curve, or a vase shape. Fabricated in wood or masonry, they can be round or square in cross-section, and plain or highly ornamented. Railings can be replaced by parapets with pierced screens. These can be stone or metal: bronze, wrought, or cast iron. The screens can be simple X-shapes, intertwining geometrical patterns, or complicated floral figures as in Art Nouveau staircases. Perhaps the simplest open railings are those of the great Adirondack camps, whose builders mimicked X-shaped wrought-iron railings in unpeeled rustic tree trunks.
Modern railings are usually metal. In his early villas, Le Corbusier used white-painted pipe railings to create a nautical image; in later buildings like the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts at Harvard, flat steel bars take the place of pipes. The railings in Mies van der Rohe’s buildings usually have only a single intermediate rail, located precisely halfway between the handrail and the floor; the vertical stanchions, the handrail, and the rail are made of identical square steel bars. The railings in Louis Kahn buildings tend to be parapets, but where he is obliged to use an open railing the design is as simple as possible. I have seen a short stair railing that consisted of a single bronze bar, bent at each end to form the uprights. Richard Meier uses metal railings, too, but because there are sometimes as many as six horizontal rails, the visual effect is more pronounced—they resemble staffs in sheet music.
When Brutalism was in fashion, railings were correspondingly heavy: concrete beams, wide enough to sit on but unpleasant to the touch, or massive wood balustrades, as solid as fenders on a truck dock. The vogue among many younger architects today is toward lightness and exposed construction, and railings reflect that fashion, too. The screens of the railings of Peter Rose’s Canadian Center for Architecture in Montreal are industrial-looking perforated sheets of anodized aluminum, prominently bolted to the stanchions. Bernard Tschumi substitutes steel cables (complete with turnbuckles) for the intermediate horizontal rails of the ramp railings of Lerner Hall at Columbia University, another nautical reference, but to a yacht rather than a steamship. These solutions appear mannered compared to the simple railing that I. M. Pei designed for the East Building of the National Gallery. The stainless steel handrail highlights the solidity of the rose-colored Tennessee marble by appearing to float in mid-air, since it is supported by continuous sheets of tempered glass embedded in the floor.
The transparent railings of I. M. Pei’s East Building are understated, elegant, and luxurious—like the building. “Beauty will result from the form and correspondence of the whole with respect to the several parts,” taught Palladio, “of the parts with regard to each other, and of these again to the whole.”8 The successful relationship of the details to each other, and to the building is governed by the architect’s sense of style. That is why the architect of my house painted the radiators to resemble wood; a technologically inclined architect might have painted them silver; a minimalist would dispense with baseboards and hide the radiators in the wall. The role of details is not to complement architecture; details are architecture. “The aesthetic understanding [of architecture],” writes Roger Scruton, “is inseparable from a sense of detail.”9 Mies van der Rohe is supposed to have said “God is in the details.”* He did not mean that details are functionally important (although they are), or that good details prolong the life of a building (although they do). He meant that details are the soul of architecture. That is why, just as an archaeologist can reconstruct a pot from a few shards, or a paleontologist can surmise the form of a prehistoric animal from bone fragments, it is possible to divine the architect’s idea of a building by examining its details.
The house that Robert Venturi built for his mother in 1964 shook the foundations of the International Style; much of this effect was the result of details. Although Venturi obviously was working in a Modernist idiom—there is a strip window and a steel-pipe railing—he also incorporated distinctly un-Modernist features such as trim, both inside and out. Classical architects use a large variety of moldings—fillet, astragal, egg and dart, ogee—that can be combined and recombined to great decorative effect. The International Style, in its effort to do away with ornament, outlawed trim. Walls were flat planes. Windows had no frames. Joints between materials were simply hairline cracks. The conspicuous exterior dado, the baseboards, and the chair-rails in the Vanna Venturi House were hardly Classical moldings—they were merely boards with chamfered edges—yet they challenged the assumption that trim and Modernism were incompatible.
Coming through the front door of the Vanna Venturi House one immediately senses that it is an unusual place. A broad stair rises beside the fireplace, then peters out to almost nothing. The fireplace looks like an abstract sculpture, but it has a traditional mantelpiece. A free-standing column à la Corbusier stands beside a chair-rail. Then there is the furniture. Ever since the Tugendhat House—for which Mies had designed the furniture—it was taken for granted that modern houses required modern furniture. Venturi has explained that “I designed the house so my mother’s old furniture (c. 1925, plus some antiques) would look good in it.”10 Instead of the iconic bent-tube Breuer chairs, there are homely ladderback chairs around the dining table; instead of an Eames lounge chair and ottoman, a comfortable stuffed sofa. It is a contradictory atmosphere—the International Style willfully distorted through the lens of traditional bourgeois domesticity.
Whether one is looking up at the tall dome of the Pantheon, descending the spiraling vortex of Wright’s Guggenheim Museum, or standing in the living room of Venturi’s small house, the experience of architecture is above all the experience of being in a separate, distinct world. That is what distinguishes architecture from sculpture—it is not an object but a place. The sense of being in a special place that is a three-dimensional expression of the architect’s imagination is one of the distinctive pleasures of architecture. To create a strong sense of place, the surroundings must be all of a piece; space, mass, shapes, and materials must reflect the same sensibility. That is why details are so important. A jarring detail or an inconsistency—something “out of place”—and the fantasy begins to crumble. Yes, fantasy. Illusion has been a part of architecture ever since the ancient Greeks made columns with a gently swelling taper to deceive the eye. This is not to say that architecture is stage décor. When the wind blows, the canvas scenery blows over; the building resists the elements. Architecture surrounds and shelters us. It is the real world but it is also a vision.
•••
The Postmodern movement that followed the Vanna Venturi House was relatively short-lived but it had an important consequence: it broke the stranglehold of Modernism, leaving designers free to explore other forms of expression. The profusion of styles that ensued is demonstrated by the work of three gifted but vastly different architects, Allan Greenberg, Hugh Newell Jacobsen, and Enrique Norten.
Allan Greenberg is a confirmed Classicist. He does not consider this an anomaly. “To be truly modern,” he writes, “means finding the dynamic balance between eternal human values and the specific demands of the present. Classical architecture provides the means to achieve this balance because it is the most comprehensive architectural language that human beings have yet developed.”11 Although Greenberg looks to the past, his is not the attitude of an archeologist. Like Carrère & Hastings, and generations of architects before them, Greenberg approaches Classicism as a tradition to be studied, absorbed—then extended.
Early in his career, after emigrating to the United States from South Africa, Greenberg was employed writing design standards for courthouses, which led to an unusual commission: the conversion of an empty supermarket into a courthouse. He gave the commercial building in Manchester, Connecticut, a new façade dominated by a large arch, over-scaled voussoirs, and a pediment. Inside, the barrel-vaulted ceiling of the lobby was supported by a Tuscan order. Greenberg had graduated from Yale in 1965, and like many of his contemporaries was experimenting with the new freedom offered by Postmodernism. However, unlike Venturi and Moore, Greenberg was not coyly introducing Classical elements into a Modernist building; he was returning to Classical roots. From this modest beginning, over the next two decades, came a variety of commissions: a suite of rooms for the Secretary of State in the United States Department of State building, several college and university buildings, and a Roman Catholic church. His commercial work included a newspaper office building in Athens, Georgia, a new entrance for Bergdorf Goodman on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, and a flagship store for Tommy Hilfiger in Beverly Hills. Greenberg is also known for large country houses, both in the United States and in Europe. Like Lutyens and John Russell Pope, he ventures stylistically farther afield in his residential work—using Georgian and American Colonial styles. One of his early houses was inspired by Mount Vernon, another by Palladio’s unfinished Villa Thiene. Several are picturesque rambling affairs whose relaxed informality recalls the best work of McKim, Mead & White.
One of my favorite Greenberg houses is a cottage set among windblown dunes on the eastern seaboard. Completed in 1992, the low-lying building is shingled, but it is not exactly Shingle Style. Recent Shingle Style buildings are often broken down into many small parts, giving them a fussy and nervous appearance. Such seaside cottages look as if a good wind could blow them away. Greenberg’s aim here is to make a heavyweight building of great solidity that is rooted firmly in the dune scrub. The one-story Atlantic façade is almost perfectly symmetrical: a large arched window flanked by two semi-circular bays, rotund sentinels standing against the ocean winds. The two-story landward side is more informal, ringed by a sheltered porch. Massivity informs the details: sturdy Tuscan columns, a heavy cornice at the eaves of the large roof, rugged window frames. The sense of robustness is accentuated by occasional delicacy: the arched window incorporates scrolled brackets that support an elegant reverse ogee molding at the eaves. Inside, the fireplace has a brick hearth, a slate lintel, and a wood surround, whose almost modern simplicity is softened by a cavetto molding beneath the mantelpiece. The ceiling is supported by exposed trusses of rough, reused timbers. Although most people would describe this house as “traditional,” this is not an exercise in a particular historical style. There is a nod here to the British Arts and Crafts architect  C. F. A. Voysey, and it is obvious that Greenberg has looked at Lutyens’ country houses. But this is a modern house, although designed by an architect with a Classical sensibility. It admirably fulfills Palladio’s call for a correspondence of the whole with the parts and the parts with the whole.
Hugh Newell Jacobsen studied at Yale under Louis Kahn, worked for Philip Johnson, and opened his own office in 1958. He established himself as a premier residential architect, winning commissions in the United States and abroad and receiving numerous design awards. Several of the awards were for restoration of historic buildings, notably the Renwick Gallery in Washington, D.C., and the Hôtel Talleyrand in Paris. A Modernist by training and inclination, Jacobsen was, nevertheless, affected by the winds of change unleashed by Venturi’s little house. Starting in 1980, he evolved a hybrid style in which American regional forms and materials are combined with International Style precision, spareness, and simplicity. A house on Nantucket in shingles and white trim looks vernacular until one notices the careful proportions and refined, elegant details such as tall French doors in the living room that slide into wall pockets that also conceal shutters and screen doors. A post-and-beam Caribbean guest house with broad overhangs has the ingenuous simplicity of a beach shack. The Palladian plan and temple-like pavilions of an Ohio residence pay homage to the local Greek Revival. An Ohio country house recalls a board-and-batten Gothic Revival farmhouse. “I endeavor to design buildings that express a sense of belonging,” Jacobsen says, “buildings that reflect or abstract the nearby architecture and the traditions dictated by the climate and local materials.”12
The Palmedo House, built in 1988, reinterprets the American Colonial architecture of its location—Long Island. At first glance, the six pavilions resemble a little village, a little Amish village, judging from the austere white wood siding, the prim details, and the identical pitched roofs. Each pavilion is a perfect little “house” with identical square and vertical multi-paned windows (that open by sliding into cunning wall pockets). This sounds precious, but Jacobsen is not a romantic. The central “house” contains the living room, a three-story space open to the roof. Although the multi-paned windows are present at an upper level of the wall, the corner of the room is glazed with large, mullionless sheets of plate glass, offering dramatic views of Long Island Sound. This is an International Style device, as is the economy of detail and the clean, cool, atmosphere of the interior. On the other hand, the fireplace, which in an orthodox International Style house would be painted brick or bush-hammered concrete, is decorously built into the wall, which gives the room a traditional, civilized air. The chief idea here is to highlight the tension between old and new, between the traditional clapboarded architecture and the demands of modern life. Whereas Greenberg seamlessly resolves this tension, Jacobsen allows it to surface. If this sounds like textbook Postmodernism, it is not. Jacobsen artlessly combines new and old without the slightest hint of irony.
Jacobsen reacts to the collapse of Modernism by seeking a compromise position, while Greenberg anchors himself in the certainties of Classicism. Enrique Norten, the youngest of the three, takes a different course—he is trying to put Modernism back together again. Norten, who studied at Cornell, established his office in his native Mexico City in 1985. In a relatively short time he produced an impressive body of work that includes institutional, commercial, and residential buildings. His major projects are a services building for the media giant TELEVISA and the National School of Theater. Both incorporate bulging, metal shell-roofs that recall the 1950s buildings of the French architect-engineer Jean Prouvé. Prouvé was intent on applying new methods of construction, particularly industrialization and prefabrication. His buildings, extremely light and assembled from standardized elements, were real “machines for living.” Norten, too, is preoccupied with industrial building technologies, the lighter the better. Double-tensed glass curtain walls are mysteriously supported by a steel-frame. Roofs hang by steel cables from steel masts. Slender, canted columns brace a glass-roofed portico. Railings, in a Norten design, are almost always opportunities for structural legerdemain: suspended sheets of glass, stretched steel cables, perforated metal screens.
In 1994, Norten built a house for himself and his family on a tight urban site in Mexico City. The three-story street façade is mostly a blank concrete wall; the wall facing the interior walled patio is entirely glass. The main living floor is open, except for the kitchen; the upper bedroom floor is shaded and given privacy by a redwood, louvered screen. A functionalist style pervades the house. The clinical cabinetwork is white-painted wood. A concrete wall in the dining room is bare save for the regular pattern of the formwork ties and the pour lines marks. The windows are large sections of plate glass in simple aluminum frames; a 10-foot section slides aside to entirely open the dining room to the patio. The sliding wall recalls the disappearing windows in Mies van der Rohe’s Tugendhat House, but the resemblance ends here. Mies’ spare interior is opulent and assertive; Norten’s is austere, almost monastic: a neutral background for family life. This is an unsentimental idea of the home. Not exactly a “machine for living,” but certainly machinelike in its precision and rational layout.
Like Greenberg and Jacobsen, Norten reflects on the past. Although his house has little to do formally with the International Style of the flat-roofed stucco villas of the 1920s—except for the white-painted circular steel columns—it shares that period’s ambitions; it is highly abstract, idealistic, technophile, and lacking in applied ornament. Decoration results not from trim, but from the surface quality of the different materials—concrete, red oak flooring, etched glass—and from the relentless articulation of structural connections. Norten’s buildings exhibit another feature of the International Style: they are placeless. That is, while they carefully respond to the specifics of the program and the site, they do not explicitly acknowledge their immediate regional context. Whether they are in Mexico or New Mexico—where Norten is building a heritage center—the style is the same: understated, coolly competent, cosmopolitan.
Whether one prefers the work of Greenberg, Jacobsen, or Norten is a matter of taste (I happen to like all three). The buildings are different, yet the three architects have something in common. They are serious about what they are doing, that is, their buildings exhibit a strong sense of conviction. They pay enormous attention to details. They are disciplined, but they understand their self-imposed rules well enough to occasionally break them. Moreover, while their architecture is built with a great sense of style, it is never merely stylized. That is because in their buildings, style—the manner of expression—is always in the service of content—that which is being expressed. Style without content quickly degenerates into caricature, like a speaker who makes grand gestures and rhetorical flourishes, but has nothing to say. The buildings of Greenberg, Jacobsen, and Norten, on the contrary, have a great deal to tell us about our past, our surroundings, and ourselves.
Greenberg, Jacobsen, and Norten do not describe what they do in terms of style. I think that there are a number of reasons that architects are uncomfortable talking about the subject. A suspicion of style is a heritage of the Modern Movement, which preached against the arbitrary dictates of style and fashion, while maintaining an unspoken but rigid stylistic consistency. So deep-rooted is this teaching that it remains a moral stricture on most architects, whether or not they are Modernists. Perhaps another reason for the reluctance to discuss style is fear. Fear that being linked to a particular style is to be put in a box—like most creative people, architects dislike being categorized. Also fear that talking about style will make architecture—a serious business—sound frivolous. Better to leave that to interior decorators and fashion designers, professions that architects regard with a mixture of disdain and envy. Finally, there is an unspoken fear of style because it is subject to the whims and the fancies of fashion. That fear, at least, seems to me to be ill-founded. An architecture that recognizes style—and fashion—would not be an architecture that is introspective and self-referential, as are so many contemporary buildings. It would be part of the world—not architecture for architects, but architecture for the rest of us. And that would not be a bad thing.

Coda
Richard Morris Hunt was the most celebrated American architect of the late nineteenth century. His preeminence is reflected by his appointment as the architect of two important national works: the centerpiece building of the Chicago World’s Columbian Exposition, and the pedestal for the Statue of Liberty. He was feted at home and abroad. Hunt was the first architect to receive an honorary doctorate from Harvard and the first American to receive a Gold Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects, and he was made an honorary member of the French Académie and a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor. A hundred years later, his counterpart is Frank O. Gehry. Since being awarded the prestigious Pritzker Prize in 1989, Gehry has gone on to win more honors than any other living architect, including such major arts awards as the Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize (a non-architectural award of which he is the first recipient) and the Japanese Praemium Imperiale, the Nobel of the art world. Even the staid American Institute of Architects, which had previously shunned Gehry in lieu of more mainstream practitioners, awarded him its top accolade, the AIA Gold Medal.
No pair of architects could be more dissimilar than this distinctly odd couple, the proper High Society favorite of the Gilded Age and the untidy bohemian from Santa Monica. Yet they bear comparison. They were both late bloomers. Gehry was 48 when he gained national recognition. Until then, he had been running his own office in Los Angeles for almost twenty years, building shopping centers, suburban offices, department stores, and apartments in competent but unremarkable renditions of L.A. modern. The project that brought him to national attention was his own remodeled house: a nondescript bungalow encased in an unsettling Cubist composition of unpainted plywood, corrugated metal, and chain-link fencing. The odd shapes and unorthodox materials marked Gehry as a maverick. That was in 1978. Unexpectedly, he attracted a broad range of commissions, not only residential clients, but also museums, public institutions, universities, corporations, and developers, and not only in the United States but around the world.
Hunt was 43 when he came into his own. He had established an architectural practice in New York in 1855, almost immediately on his return from the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. He was moderately successful, achieving local renown for the Tribune Building, an early New York skyscraper. Despite his Parisian background, Hunt worked in the prevalent Ruskinian Gothic style. Of his Presbyterian Hospital in downtown Manhattan, the architectural critic Montgomery Schuyler wrote: “The building is of Gothic design with very red brick, and very irregular stone dressings, which, it must be confessed regretfully, are not pleasing to the eye.”3 For his next project, the Lenox Library, Hunt tried something different. He borrowed from the French Neo-Grec style, popularized by Labrouste in the Bibliothèque Sainte Geneviève, adding Renaissance details and his own characteristically vigorous surface modeling. The result was a startling departure from convention, a monochrome limestone block of imposing dignity. The Lenox Library (which stood on Fifth Avenue on the site of the present-day Frick Collection) marked a shift in architectural taste, away from Ruskin to a grand and frankly aesthetic Classicism. The 1880s was a decade of great prosperity, and newly wealthy New Yorkers eagerly sought out Hunt’s architectural blend of good taste and ostentatious display. He obliged them in a string of high-profile commissions: magnificent mansions along Fifth Avenue, country houses on Long Island, and palatial “cottages” in Newport, Rhode Island. Hunt died in 1895, but in the last seven years of his life, he completed more than fifty projects.
Biltmore House in Asheville, North Carolina, is a good example of his stylistic prowess. Hunt modeled the design of this 250-room residence on the Château de Blois, whose style is not the severe Classicism of the Italian Renaissance favored by architects such as Charles McKim, but the more ornate and picturesque French Renaissance. To a modern visitor, the spires, turrets, and steep slate roofs of Biltmore recall Disneyland’s Sleeping Beauty Castle, which is not surprising since Disney also used a Loire Valley chateau—the Château d’Ussé—as his model. But the comparison does Hunt an injustice, for his design is neither prettified nor quaint. His client, George W. Vanderbilt, was a young bachelor (he married soon after the house was finished), and for him Hunt created an architecture that is robust, masculine, and immensely self-assured, not in the least like a fairytale.
Vanderbilt was drawn to French chateaux, which Hunt showed him during a whirlwind European tour, since young George and his wealthy family imagined themselves American aristocrats. There are coats of arms bearing Vs all over the house. Hunt provides his client with an imagined regal setting, but deals with the past in his own peculiar way. Although he modeled the building on Blois, he makes no attempt to create a replica of the sixteenth-century chateau, but draws details from other buildings of the period and recombines them into an original whole. Nor does he try to create the illusion that this is a sixteenth-century building—there is no artificial weathering, no aging effect no simulated historicism. The interior is modern, bright, and open. The focus of the main floor is a glass-roofed conservatory, a common nineteenth-century feature. The stonework of the house is impeccable, much crisper and more sharply defined than at Blois. Hunt was no antiquarian, and modern American technology abounds. The floors of fireproof hollow tile are supported by steel I-beams and the steep slate roofs by steel roof trusses. Cast iron replaces wrought iron and high-quality bricks, fired in the estate brickworks, back-up the limestone walls. Equally novel are the elevators and telephones, electrical lighting, hot and cold running water, and forced air central heating. There is no doubt that for Hunt, Biltmore is an up-to-the-minute modern building. That is part of its style, too.
Like Hunt, Frank Gehry enlists novel materials in his buildings. The Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, for example, is clad in titanium, previously used chiefly for building aircraft. The metallic walls curve, twist, and turn. One part of the building slides under an adjoining bridge; another emerges from a reflecting pool. Bilbainos refer to the museum as the “artichoke,” which comes close to describing it, if you can imagine a gleaming, metallic artichoke more than two hundred feet high. The seeming disorder—a chaotic collision of forms—has no architectural precedent. This is not sculptural architecture, it is walk-in sculpture.
“The plan is the generator” preached Le Corbusier, but with Gehry, the plan is the result. He appears to design from the outside in. The building as a composition comes first, the interior spaces follow. This implies that he shoehorns functions into the building, which is not the case. The Guggenheim has three distinct types of gallery spaces: traditional, skylit rooms for displaying its permanent collection of early Modernist art; a long boat-like space for temporary installations; and 11 smaller galleries, each with its own character, each dedicated to the works of a selected living artist. The artichoke accommodates them all. The building may appear offhanded, but there is nothing haphazard about the way it is organized.
Gehry’s talent is his exceptional formal imagination; his skill as an architect is to reconcile the forms he imagines with the functional demands of his client. And, of course, to find ways to build those forms. This is generally done without fuss. The titanium sheets simply follow the churning surfaces like shingles on a Shingle Style roof; limestone is used in a similarly unaffected fashion, without articulated joints. Gehry shares a minimalist approach to details with the early architects of the International Style, but he deploys these details to different ends. By removing familiar elements such as coping strips, fascias, and trim, he accentuates the sculptural quality of his buildings. There are no roofs or walls or windows in the Guggenheim, there are only swirling and twisting planes of metal, stone, and glass. An architecture critic once described Gehry as “a smart man from Hollywood,” which nicely captures the architect’s blend of exuberant showmanship and canny behind-the-scenes savvy.
Although sophisticated building techniques and innovative materials play a major role in Gehry’s buildings, like Hunt, he keeps technology off center stage. In that regard, he repudiates the mannered industrial style that pervades the work of many contemporary architects. Neither is he nostalgic about the past. Gehry rejects both the moralistic functionalism of the International Style and the traditions of Classicism. Architects have broken rules in the past, but rarely this unequivocally and totally.
Gehry, like Hunt, has changed the course of architecture. That is, he has made us look at our surroundings in a different way. The world of Gehry’s buildings is, at first glance, an odd place. The line between order and disorder is a thin one, and it is difficult to know what is intended and what is accidental. But his colliding forms and agitated architecture are curiously unthreatening. This is the way we live today, Gehry seems to be saying, why not enjoy it?



